"I sort of gave my boat away because I got paid for it in the buyout.
"Three years ago I bought the vessel for $210,000.

Tas shellfish industry consolidating
Tasmania's shellfish industry is facing significant generational change, with many family operations selling up or merging.
Richard Pugh, the general manager of Shellfish Cultures, says Tasmania's oyster industry is now more than 30 years old and many farmers are reaching retirement age.
He says a cost price squeeze and the difficulties of recruiting new farmers is leading a push towards consolidation.
"Farms [are] just moving towards getting economies of scale," he said.
"We're finding that we're getting a lot of cost squeezing happening, prices are not rising very quickly.

AWB releases grain stock onto domestic market
With many grain crops failing around the country, AWB International has started to release large stocks of grain onto the domestic market.
The feedlot and milling industry have been bidding strongly for the grain, with wheat futures on the Stock Exchange hitting more than $300 a tonne this week.
The chairman of AWB International, Ian Donges, says the company will also open up a number of silos for producers to buy grain for their livestock.
Mr Donges says AWB still has large supplies of wheat.
"The budget has been around four to 5 million tonnes," he said.
"We have got to realise that wheat of course is spread across Australia.

Grain growers expecting above average yields
While grain growers across the country watch their crops die, one small group of growers are set to reap at least average yields, in one of the most unlikely spots.
Farms in the Nundroo and Coorabie districts of South Australia, near the Nullarbor Plain in the state's far west, had good summer rains, which were followed up in April.
Local farmer Peter Stott says some paddocks have had above average rain.
"We'll go close to an average season hopefully," he said.
"We seemed to have copped a little bit more rainfall here, especially towards the coast.

Pastoralists appeal for lease payments waiver
Pastoralists in central Australia are asking the Northern Territory Government to waive their annual lease payments, as they struggle with the prolonged drought.
The Cattlemen's Association says the payments for 12 drought declared stations are worth up to $100,000.
The stations have been unable to receive the Federal Government's exceptional circumstance assistance due to means testing and the absence of specific application guidelines for the Northern Territory desert.
Vanessa Smith of Newcrowne Station, south-east of Alice Springs, says urgent help is needed to lighten the growing financial burden.
"Everything helps, absolutely everything helps, whether they waive pastoral lease payments, you know anything," she said.
"We pay $8,000 for our lease.
"That money could go elsewhere.

Govt aims to refocus some drought funding
The Federal Agriculture Minister says the Government hopes in future to refocus some of its drought funding towards helping farmers to be better prepared for dry periods.
Peter McGauran says the Government is not planning to withdraw its current drought assistance, but says the most efficient farmers should be supported.
"Don't read into that that we're going to abolish interest rate subsidies," he said.

High quality wool a hit at Sydney, Melbourne markets
The sale of high quality ultrafine wool in Melbourne and Sydney was the highlight of a fairly lacklustre week in the wool market.
A top price of 65,500 cents a kilogram was paid at the Sydney sales, with Italian buyers dominating the bidding.
On a wider note, the eastern market indicator fell two cents to 737 cents a kilogram clean.
More than 65,000 bales will be offered next week, including 5,000 bales from New Zealand.

Rural workers at high risk of sperm DNA damage: scientist
There is a claim today that men who work regularly with pesticides are likely to face difficulties fathering children.
A scientist at the University of Adelaide's Centre for Reproductive Health has been researching the damaging affect of chemicals on sperm DNA.
Dr Michelle Lane says rural workers are in a high risk group.
"We have found a clustering in some occupations with men with high DNA damage and it's often associated with men that might come in to exposure with things such as pesticides or solvents and things like that," she said.

Farmers brace for locust plagues
Victorian farmers are bracing for another summer of locust plagues, with hatchings set to begin this week.
The Department of Primary Industries (DPI) has set up portable work stations so more staff can be sent to wherever the plagues are most severe.
Dr Malcolm Campbell from the DPI says the need for increased resources was the key lesson from last year's plague.

Irrigators accreditation course to help improve image
For the first time, a national accreditation course will be available for irrigators to help improve their image as water users.
The Irrigation Association of Australia has introduced the national industry standard, which covers five minimum skills that people need to work in the sector.
Farmers who have taken part in other training schemes can also gain accreditation.
Chief executive Jolyon Burnett hopes it will reduce inefficient water management practices.
"Many farmers are still scheduling their irrigation by the tried and true old method of wandering out into the paddock, kicking the dirt, having a look to see how moist it is and then making a subjective judgment on how much water to apply," he said.

Country people set example for water-smart gardening
City gardeners facing strict water restrictions this summer could learn a lesson from their rural counterparts.
Frankie Wilkinson, from the South Australian-based Plant People Nursery, says her rural customers have always made water-smart purchases.
She says while drought is affecting many farming communities, it does not mean their gardens are turning into dust.
"Country people on the whole we find have always watered at night, or first thing in the morning, they've always mulched and this is something that I think suburban people are beginning to learn and are doing a lot more than they used to," she said.

Rural Australia to wait for access to $1b broadband network
Telstra has switched on its new $1 billion mobile broadband network at an investor briefing in Sydney.
But it will be quite some time before all regional Australians can use it.
Chief executive Sol Trujillo says the network is 100 times greater than any of its competitors and will reach 98 per cent of the Australian population.
However group general manager of Telstra Country Wide Geoff Booth says full access for rural Australia will not be possible until more towers are built.
"Wherever there is now mobile cover we'll have a broadband product, so we're going to be able to resolve a lot of those so-called dead spots in terms of broadband," he said.

Govt vows $50m for rural mental health clinics
The Federal Government has offered another $50 million in funding for mental health clinics in rural areas.
The Prime Minister, John Howard, says it will help double the level of access to mental health professionals for country residents.
Mr Howard says his government will also spend $500 million expanding the Medicare Rebate system, so that more people can get mental health services through GPs, psychiatrists and psychologists.
Mr Howard says it is part of a $1.6 billion program launched with state governments earlier this year.
"We will be committing some $51.7 million over five years to target areas of need by funding organisations like divisions of general practice and Aboriginal medical services to establish and run mental health clinical services in rural and remote communities."

Depression fears
The Grains Council of Australia says it is very concerned there will be an upsurge in depression rates as the drought tightens its grip on many states.
It estimates the country's 30,000 grain and mixed farmers will lose an average of $150,000 each on their barley and wheat crops.
Council chairman Murray Jones is urging farmers to seek help if they are not coping.
"I'm sure that this pushes a lot of people to the edge," he said.
"These are circumstances which are quite beyond their control and we're just concerned that a lot of these farm families will have some severe psychological effects on this and they need to get help if it's necessary."

Funding cuts
The cutting of funding to rural financial counselling services across Australia has come in for some strong criticism from a mental health body.
State and federal governments have been arguing over the funding, with some states threatening service cuts unless the Federal Government provides more money.
Professor Brian Kelly, from the NSW Centre for Rural And Remote Mental Health, says financial counsellors are irreplaceable during the drought.
"They're the people who are often consulted by farmers about managing the business, managing the pressures they face in farming," he said.

Landcare conference to focus on climate change
Climate change is high on the agenda at this week's International Landcare Conference, which has opened in Melbourne.
More than 1,000 farmers in Landcare, academics and representatives from natural resource groups from Australia and across the globe have converged on Melbourne, for the week-long conference.
The theme for the conference is "building communication networks to create future landscapes, lifestyles and livelihoods".
Top of the agenda is climate change and the balance between agriculture and the environment.
Kicking off proceedings today is Land and Water Australia's chairman, Bobbie Brazil, looking at if Landcare is an ancient myth or modern dreaming.
Landcare leaders will be recognised for their work at tomorrow night's National Landcare awards, presented by the Governor-General Major General Michael Jeffery.
A Canadian environmental lobbyist has told the Landcare conference that Australia would not be in a drought at all, if people used water more wisely.
Maude Barlow, who is writing a book called the Global fight for the right to water, says Australians need to change their attitudes towards water saving.
"I think the current drought situation is a reflection of over use and abuse of water," she said.

Hundreds take oil concerns to Canberra
About a thousand people turned out in Canberra yesterday to send a message to the Federal Government that it needs to take urgent action to address climate change.
The words Clean Energy for Eternity were spelt out across Reconciliation Place.
Organiser Dr Matthew Nott, an orthopaedic surgeon from Bega, says that one of the critical problems facing rural communities, which are dependent on road transport, is oil depletion.
"Petrol's going to become much more expensive in the near future, we're going to be forced to become more self sufficient. and that is going to become more and more difficult as we get hotter and drier," Dr Nott said.

Perseverance makes $46 mill offer to Leviathan
Victoria could host Australia's second largest gold producer following a takeover offer for Leviathan Resources by Perseverance Corporation.
The bid by Perseverance is worth $46 million, valuing each Leviathan share at about 56 cents.
Perseverance intends to close Leviathan's Melbourne office and move some staff and equipment from Leviathan's Stawell Gold Mine to Perseverance's Fosterville gold mine, near Bendigo.
Managing director Graeme Sloan says if accepted, the offer will deliver big benefits to Perseverance shareholders.
"We'll have the largest landholding in Victoria, very close to 6,000 square kilometres, which is quite extraordinary given the state that the largest is Newcrest," he said.

Media law debate on hold
A Senate debate on the Federal Government's controversial media laws has been delayed until tomorrow, while Communications Minister Helen Coonan continues meetings with dissenting backbench Coalition MPs and senators.
National party members are also meeting today, after Senators Barnaby Joyce and Fiona Nash indicated they could block the legislation in its current form.

Pulp mill development headed for courts
Landholders opposing a $650 million pulp mill development in South Australia will take their case to the courts.
The development, near Penola in the state's south-east, was conditionally approved by the South Australian Government last month, subject to further checks by the Environmental Protection Agency.
Lawyer Peter Humphries, acting for 30 landholders, says he will be asking the Supreme Court to review all aspects of the application process.
"There's been no environmental impact study done," he said.

Hobby farmers buy up along cattle route
Confidence in the cattle sector is attracting droves of hobby farmers to purchase stock along Queensland's central coast.
People are snapping up small parcels of former sugarcane farms and are choosing cattle, due to their relatively low maintenance requirements.
Smaller saleyards in central Queensland are on track to smash annual yarding records and Elders Livestock Agent, Matthew Lockwood, from Mackay, says he cannot see the trend slowing down.
"As the country gets broken up around the agricultural areas people do find that put a fence up and cattle are pretty easy to handy and run," Mr Lockwood said.

WA harvest off to early start
Harvest has kicked off in Western Australia much earlier than normal because of a dry finish to the season.
The first canola delivery to the state's main grain handler, Cooperative Bulk Handling, was made on the weekend in Esperance.
Farmer Gavin Egan says harvest would have been a few weeks later if there had been more spring rain.
"It's been pretty dry here the last three months, pretty well, we were lucky to get a bit of rain at the start of September which pulled us out of it a little bit, but definitely drying off rapidly," he said.

Grape vines stripped as drought continues
In far western New South Wales, a table grape grower is stripping healthy vines to keep them alive, with the Menindee Lakes system at just 15 per cent capacity.
Menindee irrigator Paul D'Ettorre says if big rains do not come by March, he faces the prospect of walking away from his family's 60-year-old farm.
While he expects table grape prices to remain steady for the season, Mr D'Ettore says the long-term future is uncertain.
"We will be okay as long as we keep getting the top-up rains, but we keep falling back," he said.

Mango prices drop as harvest picks up
The price of a tray of mangoes has halved in the past fortnight, as the Northern Territory harvest gets into full swing.
The Docking family, who are based on the fringes of Darwin's rural area at Berry Springs, are making the most of drier early build-up weather.
It can be blisteringly hot, up to 35 degrees in the shade, with humidity easily 80 per cent at picking.
But so far, 3,000 trays of mangoes have been plucked from their orchard.
That is compared to 220,000 trays across all of Darwin.
Strong winds have scratched the surface of some fruit, increasing the amount of seconds and the early premium prices have already fallen away, to below $30 a tray in the Sydney markets.

Tassie team takes out shearing championships
In just its third year of competing, Tasmania has won the team's event at the national shearing championships, in Hay, NSW, at the weekend.
The Tasmanians took out the trophy at Hay on the weekend, beating Western Australia by more than 30 points.
Team member Steve Rigby says the island state's success is remarkable, given its inexperience.
"Just three years up and running and to beat you know the other states of Australia that have been competing for a lot longer than we have ... it's a real surprise," he said.
"Not only have we got some of the best wool in Australia we've got the some of the best shearers and shed hands."

Water sensors may cut irrigation losses significantly
An irrigation expert says multi-million dollar projects using water sensors could cut irrigation losses by between 10 and 20 per cent across Australia.
That is equivalent to all the water used in urban areas.
John Langford, director of the Water Research Centre at the University of Melbourne, says the first year of trials has been completed and indications are that it could halve the cost of irrigation efficiency programs.
"It involves a unit called a nictor, which would be about the size of a coffee pot, you can dot them around at random in the landscape, so long as they are close enough to each other they will form their own wireless network," he said.

Council seeks funding for annual stored grain survey
The Grains Council of Australia says an annual survey of stored grain is needed to stop livestock farmers panic-buying overseas during droughts.
It wants both federal government research bodies, like the Grains Research and Development Corporation and the livestock industry, to pay $50,000 a year for the survey.
Grains Council chairman Murray Jones says livestock farmers need to be made aware that domestic grain is still cheaper than imported grain.
"[The] Grains Council of Australia supports the livestock industry who've been asking for an indication of a clearer picture of the availability of grain stocks," he said.
"I think it's important, both from the livestock industry and from farmers as well, that we have some some record of the greater transparency of the grain at hand."
Meanwhile the worsening dry in southern and central New South Wales will lead to job losses at Graincorp.
The largest east coast grain handler believes it will only open two thirds of its silos and dramatically cut its casual staff.
Graincorp's central regional manager Murray Wilkinson says the company does not have an option but to reduce its costs as the crop dwindles by the day.

Farm-related industries bracing for disaster: NFF
The latest Westpac-NFF rural commodity index shows a 1.7 per cent fall on the previous month, amid a drop in beef prices and predictions farm incomes will halve in the coming year.
National Farmers Federation (NFF) vice-president Charles Burke says the figures show it would be short-sighted to dismiss drought as just a problem for farmers.

Drought expected to cut cotton production
Analysts are predicting cotton growers this season will plant Australia's smallest crop in nearly 20 years.
Independent Commodity Management's Matthew Leeson says a range of factors, including the drought, will cut production to about 1 million bales.
He says the commodity's subdued price is also significant.
"Compounding the marginal moisture availability is poor price for cotton versus the well above average price for the feed grains due to the shortfall from the winter cereal crop this year," he said.

Farming region running out of water
One of Victoria's wettest farming regions is running out of water.
The water storage at Leongatha, in Gippsland, is at 24 per cent and falling and residents are on stage four water restrictions.
South Gippsland Water is auditing local businesses, including the major dairy processing plant Murray Goulburn, to see if their water use can be reduced.
Meanwhile oil tankers could ship Tasmanian water to the mainland under a new proposal.
Environment company Solar Sailer will propose harvesting fresh water from a number of sites in the state's north, when it meets the Tasmanian Government next month.
The company's Robert Dane says selling water to major cities could prove a lucrative industry.

Wine exports to UK drop
Australian wine exports have slipped to their lowest level in 16 years, with sales to the UK down 3 per cent.
The latest data from the Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation also shows the average price per litre of $3.77 was the lowest in nearly a decade.
But cheaper bulk shipments to China are outstripping all other markets, increasing fivefold to 16 million litres.
The corporation's Lawrie Stanford says the wine glut and foreign exchange issues are partly to blame and the outlook is not good.
"The Australian wine sector is clearly oversupplied at the moment and whilst volumes are growing on the back of principally bulk sales, prices are clearly falling as a result," he said.

Frost decimates Limestone Coast vineyards
After frosts earlier hit the Barossa Valley, they have now decimated vineyards along the Limestone Coast of South Australia, wiping millions off the value of this year's vintage.
The region that's famous for its full blooded red wines could lose most of this year's grape crop after the temperature dropped below minus three for the second morning in a row.
Damage has been most severe in the Padthaway Valley.
Grower Ian Ward says he has lost about 90 per cent of his crop.
"I've got a couple of neighbours who are a hundred per cent affected, I have another neighbour who might be only something like 10 per cent [affected and got off pretty lightly," he said.

Rural doctors push for fly-in, fly-out mental health workers
The Rural Doctors Association of Australia says the federal and state governments need to fund fly-in, fly-out mental health workers to deal with a major shortage in regional and remote areas.
It says the Federal Government's announcement yesterday that it is expanding access to mental health staff under Medicare and setting up new rural clinics will not work if staff can not be persuaded to go to the bush.
Association president Dr Ross Maxwell says while more psychologists and psychiatrists need to be trained, it still would not be enough to fix the rural shortfall.

Urgent talks needed to reassure North Asian trade partners: Opposition
The Federal Opposition says the diplomatic row over North Korea's claimed nuclear weapon test will have to be carefully defused to prevent Australia's trade into North Asia being disrupted.
The Government says it is looking to the UN Security Council to take action against North Korea.
The Opposition's trade spokesman, Kevin Rudd, says China, Taiwan, Japan and South Korea buy $70 billion of commodities and products from Australia, and urgent talks are needed to reassure them.

Scientists pool resources to look at illegal fishing impact on sharks
The impact of illegal fishing upon sharks in north Australian waters is being studied, as part of a new research collaboration.
Marine scientists are pooling resources at Darwin's Arafura Timor Research Facility which has cost $3.5 million to build.
Chief executive officer Stuart Fitch says the laboratories allow advanced genetic fingerprinting of marine material, including seized shark fin.
"This is a genetic sequencing analyser or as most people would probably understand it from CSI on TV, DNA analysis," he said.

King Is plantation development ban worries timber industry
Tasmania's timber industry is worried that a ban on plantation development on King Island will set a precedent.
The chief executive of the Forest Industries Association of Tasmania, Terry Edwards, says he is surprised that the planning policy to prohibit plantations on the island was upheld yesterday after legal scrutiny.
He is concerned other councils will now try to limit plantation development.
"We now have a situation seemingly in Tasmania where councils can tell farmers what crops they can or cannot grow on their land," he said.

Apples may be used to produce ethanol
Apples could be the next agricultural commodity used to produce ethanol.
The horticulture industry in Western Australia's south-west says unsaleable fruit could be juiced and be turned into biofuel, fetching up to $120 a tonne.
And Vic Grisotis from Apple and Pear Australia says other fruits could also be used.
"If it's a sugar based product there's no reason why it can't be," he said.

Govt may extend drought assistance
The Federal Government is considering extending its drought assistance in the face of worsening conditions across many states.
It says the current system was set up to deal with one or two-year droughts rather than the series of dry years farmers have faced.
The federal Agriculture Minister, Peter McGauran, says the Government is worried that farmers in areas where there has been some rain are slipping through cracks in the system, so changes are being considered.
"We don't believe now with the failed spring any of those areas have any possibility of recovery, so rather than wait until they meet another criteria, we should be able to move them straight into drought declaration," Mr McGauran said.
But the Opposition's agriculture spokesman, Gavin O'Connor, says the Government has been too slow to act.
"Even in EC declared areas, only 13 per cent of farmers have ever accessed these particular provisions."
The Government says planned changes will make it easier for areas to become drought declared for EC assistance.
It says they will stop rainfall in one district ruling out help for a whole region and allow EC declarations to last longer than 12 months.
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says the current drought emergency requires immediate intervention.
Chief executive Ben Fargher says the politicians are now aware farmers are not whingeing, but looking for targeted measures to deal with the crisis.
"We need to make sure that EC program is working as well as it could," he said.
"We would also like the government to consider further changes to EC about some eligibility criteria, lifting caps on interest rate subsidy assistance and some technical matters like that.

Wheat shortage prompts price spike
World wheat prices have enjoyed their biggest two-day gain in 18 years on the Chicago Board of Trade, amid global supply concerns as droughts affect Australia, India, Europe and the US.
Prices soared 13 per cent to $US5.24 a bushel, the highest level in 10 years before dropping slightly.
The frantic price spike comes after the Grains Council slashed its forecast for the Australian wheat harvest to 12 million tonnes, though American producers believe the Australian crop will be even smaller than that.
The wheat futures rally has been spurred by the massive areas of cereal and canola crops failing in southern and central New South Wales.
These were the comments from producers today from Dubbo through to the Murray River.
"Things have really gone downhill in the last couple of weeks, our deliveries say to Condobolin is probably lucky to get 10 per cent of the normal 150,000 tonnes," one producer said.
"Some areas there will be a small amount of grain harvested, probably about 90 per cent of the canola has now been cut for hay and a small proportion of the wheat has been cut for hay," said another.
"Very little more than 30 per cent will see a header at this stage, I think people are glossing over just how serious this is, another producer said.
"I know we have got people around here turning there stock in on their crops for the first time in 40 odd years. It's very ordinary.

Dairy farmers' incomes increase
Australian dairy farm cash incomes have increased by nearly a quarter in the past financial year to just over $100,000 a farm.
Figures released by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE) show Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia performing strongly.
But incomes fell in Tasmania, New South Wales and Queensland as the drought pushed up fodder costs and cut milk production.
Colin Mues, from ABARE, says high prices paid by dairy processors made a big difference to the bottom line.
"The main factor driving that was higher milk prices through improvements in the dairy market," he said.
"Production was fairly steady, it went down marginally at a national level but there was a fairly uniform improvement in prices across all states and I think that's been the key factor driving it and the price increases were, you know, between 3 and 5 per cent."
But dairy farmers in Western Australia refute ABARE's figures.
Farmer John Giumelli says cost of dairying land is so high that profit making is almost impossible, even with better milk prices.
"The attrition rate in dairy farms in WA is absolutely shocking but it's an indictment of what pressure the industry is under and I take no joy out of the ABARE figures," he said.

Environmentalist honoured at Landcare awards
Environmentalist Rick Farley has been remembered at this year's national Landcare awards.
The award winners were announced last night in Melbourme.
One thousand people flew in from across Australia and as far as Africa to attend the event.
Eleven awards were handed out to farmers, schools, and shire councils for excellence in land conservation.
Western Australia dominated taking home three awards, New South Wales and South Australia two and one went to Tasmania, Queensland and the Northern Territory.
Governor-General Major General Michael Jeffery presented the ABC with an award for its support.
But for many whose lives were touched by the late Mr Farley, a co-founder of Landcare, it was the dedication of an international award in his name that was the highlight of the evening.

ACCC urged to investigate alleged price gouging
The NRMA is calling on the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission to investigate what it alleges is price gouging by Australia's oil companies, as fuel prices fall.
NRMA director and former NFF president Graham Blight is meeting National party senators in Canberra today to discuss the issue.
He says claims by the oil companies that they are passing on all of the recent falls in wholesale fuel prices are simply not accurate.
"The Singapore unleaded price has dropped by 29 per cent," he said.
"The crude price has dropped 22 per cent. So the difference between what we've had here is a drop of 14 per cent and the Singapore unleaded is 15 per cent.

Confrontation looms over US farm policy
A showdown is looming over US farm policy, one that could be even more fierce in the wake of Congressional elections next month.
The Bush administration has been singing the praises this year of cutting farm supports.
But farm state lawmakers are resisting sweeping reforms and opposition could stiffen if Democrats regain control of at least the House amid several Republican scandals.
Likely Democratic Agriculture chairman, Collin Peterson, blames US WTO concessions.
Mr Peterson says he is not going to give up 60 per cent of the US farm program until the EU, Japan and others give up their barriers to trade.

Zinc price soars
The price of zinc has soared to $US1.66 a pound as world stocks slip to their lowest level in 15 years.
Zinc miner Zinifex says official stocks are likely to drop to zero next year because of low production.
Commodities analyst with the ANZ bank, Andrew Harrington, says tight supply on the London Metals Exchange will push prices up further.
"What they're saying is the official stocks in LME [London Metals Exchange] will probably get very, very low and obviously as they do that prices go up," he said.

Mangoes to be sold in cardboard trays
Whole trays of mangoes will be for sale in supermarkets this season.
Retailers have demanded the mango packing sheds change over to smaller, black cardboard trays.
Packing the new trays means a lot more work.
But Joe Schwarer, a Northern Territory packing shed manager, hopes the trays will sell more fruit.

Parents warned not to use animal treatments on children
The Australian Veterinary Association is warning parents not to use treatments designed for animals on children.
The association's Dr Matthew Miles says he has heard reports from Victoria of animal flea treatments being used to combat head lice in children.
He says the practice is dangerous.
"There's no safety data whatsoever to describe their use in people and we just don't know what are the effective levels or safety levels," he said.

Gold mine set to reopen
A gold mine in far north-western New South Wales that closed more than 100 years ago may reopen.
A 700 square kilometre prospect centred on Tibooburra was originally mined from 1880 to 1891 before water shortages and low gold prices forced its closure.

Rejected bananas may be returned at growers' expense
More than 1,400 cartons of bananas from northern New South Wales have been rejected by Victoria and may be returned at the growers' expense.
Growers were seeking the better prices from the Melbourne market.
But the $100,000 shipment was sent without the certification needed to ensure it was not ripe and therefore safe from fruit fly.
Arthur Akehurst, from the Department of Primary Industries, says the actions breach interstate trade regulations.
"This action has endangered the arrangements we have with Victoria but I hope Victoria sees it as a one off and doesn't take further action," he said.

Govt's training vouchers 'a positive response'
Rural training bodies have given the Federal Government's plans to give training vouchers to school drop-outs a cautious welcome.
Prime Minister John Howard says people over 25, who did not complete Year 12, will be able to use the $3,000 vouchers to pay for vocational courses in TAFEs, federal colleges and private institutions.
The chairman of the Rural Training Council of Australia, Peter Griffin, says the plan would go some way towards easing rural skills shortages.
"It's a very positive response. The skills shortage is a complex issue through rural and regional Australia," he said.

Firefighters battle blazes in Tas, Vic
Tasmanian fire services say they have brought under control all 12 bushfires around the state.
The worst blazes are in the state's south, although fires have also been reported on Flinders Island and Cape Barren Island.
There have been no reports of serious property damage but with temperatures pushing 30 degrees, the fire service warns the situation could worsen.
In Victoria, a bushfire burning south of Mt Baw Baw in Gippsland has spread to 300 hectares, driven by strong northerly winds.
Fifty firefighters are working on the blaze and bulldozers are cutting containment lines to stop its spread.

Cyclone warning for Top End residents
Residents living the Northern Territory's Top End region are being urged to take preparations for the coming cyclone season very seriously.
CSIRO surveys have shown tropical cyclone Monica, which hit the Arnhem Land coast in April, devastated a wider area and more vegetation, and brought stronger winds than cyclone Tracy, which flattened Darwin in 1974.
Researcher Dr Gary Cook says Monica snapped off trees at the trunk up to 40 kilometres inland.
"The cyclone went past and did a lot of damage in Maningrida, but in the bush there was only about 15 per cent of the trees were snapped off or toppled over," Dr Cook said.
"Whereas out where cyclone Monica crossed the coast was closer to 80 per cent that compares to cyclone Tracy with Darwin, where it was only about one third of eucalyptus trees in town were toppled over with cyclone Tracy.

Bankers 'not forcing farmers' off land
The Australian Bankers Association has defended the banks' record in dealing fairly with drought-stricken farmers, following an appeal from Deputy Prime Minister Mark Vaile.
Mr Vaile has written to the major banks urging them not to foreclose on farm loans.
The bankers association's rural policy director, Stephen Carroll, says foreclosures are at a historically low level, because farmers are not waiting to be told before deciding to quit the land.
"The banks are not in the business of forcing people to get out of their businesses or to sell assets,'' he said.

Climatologists back farmers on dry weather
Climate modelling from around the world continues to support what farmers have believed for years, that it is getting drier.
Climatologist Dr Ian Foster, from Western Australia's Department of Agriculture and Food, says there has been a shift to a noticeably drier climate in the south-west of Western Australia and that is set to continue for the next century.
He says that trend is now also coming through elsewhere in Australia.

Egg prices set to climb
Egg farmers are warning that the drought may force them to increase their prices by around 30 cents per dozen.
The Australian Egg Corporation says egg farmers have been struggling to carry the additional costs of rising grain prices.

DNA cattle feed test draws attention
Queensland's Gold Coast saw a gathering of 650 people today for Beefex, the Australian lot feeders national conference.
The cost of grain feed is on everyone's lips.
The commercial release of a new DNA test that can identify which cattle are likely to put on the most weight with the least feed has been announced today.
CSIRO Livestock Industries and its commercial arm, Genetioc Solutions, took 18 months to identify four genetic markers that influence the feed intake efficiency of cattle.
Feedlotters might feed a steer 1.5 tonnes of feed over a 100 days.
The announcement has drawn lots of attention as feed prices spiral across the country.

AAC grazing plan proves successful: manager
The nation's largest pastoral house has proved you can graze cattle productively in the outback without fences.
The Australian Agricultural Company (AAC) is using water and herding to control grazing across 500 square kilometres.
Rockhampton Downs manager Ben Wratten says it has taken two years to change the habits of cattle and so reduce overgrazing.
"We rotate them and alternate them from watering points by shutting off the ones we do not want them to drink at," he said.
"We have got hard evidence now that it has definitely made a difference in the recovery of our pasture and we have full crowns of mitchell grass within 200 metres of the trough.
"The cattle are burning a lot less energy to access good bulk feed.

Wheat ship remains idle
A German owned ship loaded with 72,000 tonnes of AWB wheat bound for Sudan remains idle in Port Lincoln in South Australia.
Following negotiations overnight, eight crew members who went on strike over pay and conditions will now be sent back to the Philippines, leaving the ship anchored in the port.
Dean Summers from the International Transport Workers Federation says the ship's owners are looking for more crew but it might be hard to attract them.
"I think it will be a couple of days and these guys will be sent home," he said.
"We have got to wait for the Filipino seafarers to join it again, so there will be eight more guys coming onto this.
"Although the guys coming on will have to realise that they will be expecting wages about half the already low international minimum, so it would not be a very attractive deal for anybody."

US endorsement expected to increase canola oil production
An Australian oilseeds forum has heard that worldwide canola oil production is expected to increase after the US Food and Drug Administration gave its health backing to the product.
Delegates at the annual conference in Melbourne have gathered to discuss the world outlook for oilseeds, as well as genetic modification (GM) technology and biodiesel.

Mining expansion may affect water resources
The coal industry has conceded that water resources may be damaged by rapid expansion of underground mining in New South Wales.
Spending on coal exploration in New South Wales has increased by 50 per cent in the last year and many new mines are set to open in the Hunter Valley and the state's north west.
Chris Moran, from the Sustainable Minerals Institute at Queensland University, says the scientific understanding of underground aquifers and the technology needed to mine around them still haven not been developed.
"The question here is whether we have done the technical engineering research early enough to have effectively worked out the cracking, the surface slumping and started to look at underground techniques that will allow either the cracks to be sealed up or the cracking to be minimised during the process of mining," he said.

Wine cheaper than bottled water
A supermarket in Australia's second largest wine growing region is currently selling wine more cheaply than bottled water.
In another sign of the wine industry's plight, the Fisher's supermarket chain in north-west Victoria's Sunraysia area has locally produced cleanskin reds and whites for $2 a bottle.
Director Alan Fisher says he is not cashing in on the difficulties of wine-grape growers in his local community because the only answer to the oversupply will be to move excess stocks.
"There is a huge glut and we have got to get rid of it somehow," he said.
"I think what we are seeing is people selling it to people like ourselves to get rid of it as a cleanskin.

Young scientists recognised for innovative ideas
Using aerosol spray to administer vaccine to chickens, harvesting gold from plants and tackling pneumonia in pigs, are among the innovative ideas of 20 young Australian scientists.
The winners of the 2006 Science and Innovation Awards for Young People in Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry were announced last night in Canberra.

Vic farmers hit out at drought assistance package
Farmers have reacted angrily to the Victorian Government's drought assistance package, announced yesterday, saying they have missed out once again.
Much of the $12.5 million package focuses on assistance for communities.
Assistance for farmers includes mental health services and counselling, business support and farming advice.
Goulburn Valley dairy farmer Dudley Bryant says the days are numbered for farmers unless they get some financial help immediately.
"I think they're treating us like idiots," he said.
"They think that we need social workers running around here patting us on the back and telling us that everything is going to be all right.
"And they've missed the real point, [which] is that farmers and rural communities can look after themselves.

Water Initiative has room for improvement: report
The first stage of a national assessment of Australia's water resources has found there is considerable room for improvement.
The Australian Water Resources 2005 report is a baseline assessment of Australia's national water resources conducted by national independent agencies including the CSIRO.
It is designed to show how the National Water Initiative, a blueprint for the country's water reform, is influencing Australia's water resources.
It reveals there is considerable room for improvement and says the state and federal governments need to take firm action to put in place effective water planning to protect river systems and to agree on a national standard for sustainable yields of surface and ground water systems.

Water trading plans will damage country towns: Joyce
National party Senator Barnaby Joyce says the Federal Government's current water trading plans will damage the social and economic infrastructure of regional towns.
He has made the comments after a meeting with the head of the Murray-Darling Basin Commission, Wendy Craik.
There are plans to take more water for environmental flows and increase water trading across state boundaries.
Senator Joyce says the very life of country towns is in jeopardy because their economic prosperity will be traded away with the permanent sale of their water.
"What'll happen is the function of small towns based around irrigation on a sustainable basis will lose their water to other mechanisms that probably don't have the same history, the same infrastructure, economic and social infrastructure based round them," he said.

Drought behind land value increase
Climate change and drought are boosting Northern Territory land values.
There have been 38 sales in the Top End's tightly held pastoral estate over the past five years.
Land valuer Frank Peacocke says well over half of the investors are Queenslanders.
"It may level out a little bit, probably when the interest rates take a bit of a turn or the cattle market takes a turn," he said.
"But most of them have property somewhere else in Queensland.

Cereal farmers head north
A small group of cereal farmers from northern New South Wales has had enough of drought conditions and has bought some of the wettest agricultural land in the country.
They have purchased cane farms in north Queensland's Tully area, where annual rainfall regularly exceeds 4,000 millimetres.
Until now, Hugh Ball has grown things like wheat, barley, chick peas and dry land cotton, but he says he and a few mates decided to branch out.
"Really there were three fellas sitting round a table and we're all farmers," he said.
"We're all [from] family driven farms and we were just looking for an opportunity.
"We couldn't do it ourselves so we thought if we team up and use individual expertise this was a logical place to start looking, good rain.

Oil companies deny collusion claims
Australia's oil companies have told a Senate inquiry they are not colluding with each other to manipulate prices.
Caltex is appearing before the petrol pricing inquiry in Canberra today, while BP has also made a submission.
Caltex's chief executive Des King says the company only makes a profit of 2.2 cents after tax on each litre of fuel sold.
He has told senators that competition, not collusion, is the main driver for setting petrol prices.
"It is very important to people who operate petrol stations to have high-volume traffic through their station because if somebody finds that if their traffic through their station is low, they will then follow the price down, if somebody's already led the price down, to get their volume back up, because this is very much a low margin, high volume kind of business," he said.
Committee member, Senator Andrew Murray, says it is unlikely collusion is taking place between the oil companies.

Natural resource management a high priority for farmers: survey
A new survey by the Australian Bureau of Statistics shows farmers on average spend 121 days of work, or $28,000 in financial terms, maintaining their properties each year.
The survey of 20,000 farmers between 2004-2005, found Australia's primary producers spent $3.3 billion annually on natural resource management.
While the grain and beef industries were the biggest spenders, the highest spender per farm was the cotton industry at a $250,000 a year.
The director of environment statistics, David Brereton, says the study identified how much time and money farmers spend maintaining their properties and their environment, and in what ways.
"Out of the $3.3 billion nationally, weed stacked up as the major cost with $1.3 billion or one third of that being spent on weeds, land and soil issues were $900 million and pest issues was $720 million," he said.

Ethanol plant proposal shelved
The Australian ethanol industry has taken another blow, with Bundaberg Sugar deciding to shelve a $20 million ethanol plant in north Queensland.
The company has blamed a lack of ethanol buyers for the decision, but also acknowledges it was unlikely to meet a deadline to qualify for $12 million in federal assistance.
Caroline Honan, from leading ethanol producer, the Manildra Group, says the Federal Government must do more for the fledgling biofuels sector.

Qld Govt to pay farmers to destroy smut infested cane
The Queensland Government will pay cane farmers $2,000 a hectare to plough out and remove sugar cane crops infested by smut.
The long awaited plan of attack comes months after the fungal disease was first discovered near Childers in the state's south-east.
Since smut was found in June, surveillance has uncovered it on more than 60 properties, totalling 380 hectares in the Isis and Bundaberg region.
Isis Canegrowers chairman Joe Russo says destruction measures will help contain the disease to south-east Queensland.
"I see no point in leaving smut infested blocks out there," he said.
"We've now identified smut in some of those blocks of ratoon that have been harvested for the 2006 season.
"So it does go to show that we cannot leave it there and let the wind just blow it around.

Bird flu simulation to test Australia's response
The Federal Health Minister, Tony Abbott, says a four-day bird flu pandemic simulation will test Australia's quarantine and health systems on Monday.
He says the $4 million exercise is the biggest health crisis simulation ever undertaken in Australia and will involve more than 1,000 Commonwealth and state government officials and staff.
Mr Abbott says part of the exercise will involve a passenger carrying bird flu arriving at Brisbane Airport on Tuesday.
"It will help test our border control, disease detection and surveillance, contact tracing, quarantine and treatment systems," he said.
Australian actors, film makers, musicians and the late Steve Irwin have all contributed to increasing sales of Australian wine in the United States.
The industry says they have all helped boost awareness of our country and wine sales to the US have increased in a decade from 2 million to 23 million cases a year.
And New York based Jan Stuebing-Smyth from Wine Australia says there is still room for the market to grow.
"It's our job to show them the diversity," she said.
"They now see Australia as one big place.

Drought forces revision of USDA wheat forecast
The US Agriculture Department (USDA) has made dramatic changes to its latest wheat forecast based largely on the unfolding Australian drought disaster.
The USDA knocked down its estimate of Australian wheat production by a whopping 8.5 metric tonnes to just 11 million tonnes in just one month and this has sharply changed US numbers.
Chairman of USDA's World Agricultural Outlook Board Gerald Bange blames Australia's drought and extreme heat.
"The Australians will not be in the export market the way they would have been otherwise," he said.
"As a result of that, we have increased our export forecast today.
"We went up 25 million bushels from our previous forecast."

Water restrictions yet to be introduced in Broken Hill
Despite the critical shortage of water in the Menindee Lakes in western New South Wales, the city of Broken Hill remains without water restrictions.
The lakes system, which supplies the city with all its water, is down to just 14 per cent capacity.
But Country Energy's Brian Steffan says restrictions have not been introduced, partly because of concerns about lead poisoning.
"Broken Hill being situated where it is has significant issues with lead dust, so what we need to do is make sure that we have enough water," he said.
"We use more water than other eastern cities [and] towns because we need to make sure that we have water to keep the lead dust down."
Meanwhile high security irrigators in the New South Wales Murray Valley have become the latest farmers to have their water allocations reduced.
Allocations are now back to 80 per cent of entitlement.
A similar cutback was made recently in South Australia.
The New South Wales Government says inflows in September were the lowest on record and there has been no October rain so far.
The chairman of the New South Wales Irrigators Council, Col Thomson, says he is not surprised by the decision, which he says will affect many farmers.
"Dairy farmers and those people that haven't had enough water on low security have been very active in the market and a lot of high security have traded down to what they would normally use in a year," he said.

Locust spraying under way
The WA Department of Agriculture and Food will start spraying for locusts today.
Numbers are said to be some of the worst on record and the locusts are getting stuck into what little feed and crops are around in this dry season.
Department crews, along with farmers, have been surveying farms for some months now and have detected target zones that will be controlled before locusts swarm.

Kosciuszko bushfire contained
A 5,000 hectare bushfire in the Kosciuszko National Park has been contained by weekend rain but it is still a complex operation to put it out.
No property was lost in the blaze but searing temperatures and hot westerly winds swept the flames through new grasslands that had grown where the trees were burnt in the 2003 summer fires.
Incident controller Ian Stewart says firefighters will be winched into "hot spots" to put out any fires still burning in the rugged country near the snow line.
"Yesterday we had a FLIR [forward looking infra red sensor/laser range] machine come down, that's a helicopter with a forward looking infrared device which picks up hot spots," he said.

Durum wheat production cut
The dry weather and crown rot disease have forced South Australia's durum wheat production to be cut dramatically this season.
Durum is used is making pasta.
Estimates are down from last year's 180,000 tonnes to just 40,000 tonnes.
Michael Jaeschke, president of the SA Durum Growers Association, says the crop estimates will continue to decline as harvesting begins.
"Unfortunately durum seems to be the first one to go out in a dry season like this," he said.
"There's a lot of durum on the ground now that's been cut down for hay and what's left there is really struggling to form any sort of grain.

Frost hits Tas orchards
Tasmania's fruit growers are bracing for heavy losses after frosts hit orchards around the State overnight.
The full extent of the damage will not be known until later in the week, but early reports suggest severe losses of cherries, apricots and apples.
Steve Wilson from the University of Tasmania says orchardists in the State's south have been hit hardest.
"Most growers won't be aware of whether they've suffered any damage until probably late this afternoon or in the next couple of days," he said.

Exercise tests pandemic influenza response
Brisbane is hosting a national exercise responding to a suspected case of pandemic influenza.
The exercise follows a simulated outbreak of foot and mouth disease a couple of years ago.
Queensland chief veterinary officer Ian Douglas says "Exercise Consumption" is the first of its size and scope anywhere in the world but is not directly linked to bird flu.
"Health authorities have been concerned since about 2003 that the H5N1 type of influenza of birds, because there's so much of it about, that it may be the candidate to mutate or change, that it can go in humans and therefore I guess, in the back of everyone's mind, yes that's probably a scenario," he said.

Companies may have to look overseas to fill labour demand
Australia's resources sector says it will be difficult to find an extra 70,000 workers over the next decade, estimated to meet its demand for labour.
A new report by a nationwide skills shortage working group shows that Western Australia will struggle the most, with the minerals industry there demanding an extra 42,000 jobs.
Reg Howard-Smith from WA's Chamber of Minerals and Energy says mining companies may have to look overseas.
"I think one of the things that we will have to do is continually look at immigration," he said.
"Immigration's not going to be the sole solution by any means, it's across the board and as I say, working with the people that are here.
"But immigration is going to be an important element, I think, if we are to meet these targets."
Meanwhile Australia's coal industry has been told it needs to properly coordinate its infrastructure needs if it i to reap the benefit of future exports.
A report released by the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) warns against interstate rivalry over new port and rail facilities.
ABARE expects coal exports to rise to 435 million tonnes within 20 years, but says it is critical that new mines and infrastructure developments do come on stream.
Don Gunasekera from ABARE's minerals branch says despite moves to energy production from sources such as LNG, coal will remain a mainstay of Australian exports.

Pineapple anti-dumping measures to be expanded
The Australian pineapple industry has had a win against cheap Asian imports.
Anti-dumping measures will be expanded over the next five years in a bid to stop cheap processed pineapple being dumped on the Australian market.
Golden Circle chief executive John Cook hopes the new measures will improve domestic prices.

Aust producers may gain ground in US restaurant trade: analyst
A visiting US analyst says Australia's reputation for good quality beef could see exporters gain ground at the quality end of the coveted American market.
Australia's disease free status, reputation for quality and the National Livestock Identification Scheme should help Australia sell more beef to the restaurant trade rather than the traditional hamburger market.
The publisher of the US-based Cattle Buyers Weekly, Steve Kay, has this encouraging message for Australian producers.

Grazier fined over NLIS breach
For the first time in Queensland, a grazier has been fined for breaching the state's new cattle identification system.
The National Livestock Identification System (NLIS) is an electronic system of tags for tracing livestock diseases back to the source.
Ron Glanville, from the Queensland Department of Primary Industries, says the grazier was taken to court over eight head of cattle that were discovered at Dalby's saleyards without tags.
He says the man was fined $500 but no conviction was recorded.

King Is residents seek wave power study
Residents of King Island in Bass Strait are calling for a feasibility study into wave power, in the hope that one day the island could be self-sufficient in electricity.
Australian-developed technology is currently being trialled at Port Kembla in New South Wales but King Island resident David Kerr says he would also like to see it tested off King Island's coast, which is known for its blustery weather.
He says the island's position is ideal.
"We have an active wave climate here on the western side of the island in particular, being at 40 degrees south in the path of the roaring forties," he said.

Grain companies to feel impact of drought
An agribusiness analyst predicts the unprecedented drought will wipe tens of millions of dollars of profit off key grain handling and marketing companies.
Austock predicts Australian winter wheat production will be down 60 per cent on the national five year average to 13.4 million tonnes.
Analyst Paul Jensz says while many key grain businesses have cut costs and rationalised, it will not be enough to curtail the effect of the massive drop in grain volumes.
"Graincorp for instance will be the most impacted, it will have a negative profit of around minus $20 million for 07 in our estimates," he said.

Govt extends drought support package
The Prime Minister says the Federal Government is extending its drought support package because it is not prepared to let the number of farmers in Australia drop below a critical level.
John Howard says Australia owes its character and history to its farmers and so the Federal Government is not prepared to let the drought dramatically reduce the number of farms.
He has announced that in 18 already drought declared areas now irrigators, dairy farmers and dryland farmers will be able to claim exceptional circumstances payments.
Mr Howard has also extended income support and interest rate subsidy relief until March 2008 to take account of the length of the drought.

International harvests extended
Less sugar was traded last week and the prompt March 2007 contract ranged between 11 and 11.87 US/ pound, and settled at 11.71 this morning. Queensland Sugar marketing manager Paul Heeney says some of the other international sugar harvests will be extended. 

Collinsville mine waiting for final green light
After 10 years of exploration in the Collinsville area and 18 months of preliminary development, Q Coal Pty Ltd is expecting to start serious construction early next year. Situated in the Charters Towers mining district, the open cut mine is six kilometres south of Collinsville. Managing director Christopher Wallin says the final deadline for community objection to the project is November 8 and they have applied for three, 30 year leases to support the open cut mine.
"We believe that there'll be over 100 jobs full time and during construction of course there'll be several hundred jobs in the construction phase."

Grain price hikes felt from the trough to the plate
It's going to cost a lot more to put food on your plate, as the flow on effect from a hike in grain continues down the line. As the State's overall supply dwindles, it's not just the bigger agricultural industries like cattle feedlots feeling the pinch, small time producers, egg farmers, bakers, and even coffee shops are being forced to increase their price to keep afloat.
Fiona Eastwell and her family has just bought an agricultural business near Townsville and while it's too early for them to feel it in the north, their coffee shop and restaurant business in south-east Queensland has seen the consequences.
"We are considering pulling sandwich prices up, meal prices up- just a little of everything over the board because it effects from making pikelets, from buying in gateaus and cakes."
Jeff Ironside owns 12 Oaks Poultry, Townsville and manages 200,000 chooks to supply eggs to a number of businesses. He's seen a huge increase in grain prices, as he buys over 5000 tonnes of grain annually and is looking at a rather dramatic increase in his own prices to maintain a profit margin.
"Normally we're looking to stock up, but there's not a lot of grain on the ground and what there is, is as dear as poison."
David Henderson from Riverina Australia, a grain supplier based in Oakey in south-east Queensland says there is a major shortage of sorghum, wheat and barley, and as their product is sent to agencies all around Queensland can see the whole industry from the paddock to the trough.
He says he hasn't seen a price hike as severe as this before.

NFF encourages support for farmers
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says critics of the Federal Government's extension to its drought support are ignoring economic reality.
Environmental scientists from the Wentworth Group and the Australia Institute say the $350-million extension to the relief program is encouraging farmers to stay on unviable land.
But NFF president David Crombie says farmers must be supported, so when the drought breaks they are ready to quickly ramp up production.
"I mean Australian agriculture contributes something like $103 billion into the Australian economy, $30 billion in exports, 1.6 million jobs, we're achieving productivity growths of 3-4 per cent. Australian agriculture is very important to Australia," he said.

Package welcomed
The exceptional circumstances (EC) extension is very welcome in the grazing country from Canberra south to the Victorian border.
From Braidwood to the Snowy Mountains, graziers have been destocking and trying to survive for several years on less than half average rainfall.
Brian Clifford, from the Cooma Rural Lands Protection Board, says governments cannot do any more now for farmers, unless they can make it rain.
"At least they're recognising that they need the rural industry and it is a one in one hundred or probably worse now," he said.
"I think it's great news what they have done and let's hope we get a break in the autumn."
But the first stage of the drought assistance package will offer relief to only a handful of Queensland primary producers - about 14 farmers in the North Burnett region.
Queensland Farmers Federation executive officer John Cherry hopes future announcements will have more benefits for his members.
And Western Australian farmers have missed out altogether because a state drought assistance scheme ends at a later date than state aid elsewhere.
Meanwhile a prominent Australian researcher says the drought is even worse than most of us think.
Professor Paul Perkins, from the Centre for Resource and Environmental Studies at the Australian National University, says our dry conditions are being mirrored in places like the western United States, Spain and Portugal.
He says Australia must learn to produce twice as much food with half the water, to help feed the world.
"It appears that in areas of the Northern Hemisphere, similar to ours, this summer just finishing has been much worse than 2002," he said.
"Which means you have got another bad summer coming in Australia, much worse than any since European settlement in Australia.

Govt abandons Paradise Dam water tender process
A new way of marketing water to irrigators in Queensland appears to have failed.
Queensland Government-owned SunWater has abandoned the tender process for the sale of water from the new Paradise Dam in southern Queensland.
The 300,000 megalitre dam, currently at just 13 per cent capacity, is west of Bundaberg on the Burnett River, but its water has attracted only limited interest from irrigators.

Cane toads may head south with flooding rains
If the drought ends, with the traditional flooding rains, it could introduce an unwelcome pest to the south-eastern states.
Frog expert Professor Mike Tyler says cane toads are already present in the southern Queensland areas of the Murray Darling basin and will start moving downstream along the Darling when it floods, possibly as far as South Australia.
He says it is not a matter of if they head south, but when.
"The Murray system itself is really perfect environment for the cane toad," he said.
"I'm not talking about the major river channel itself but instead the billabongs along the side.

Iron ore prices forecast to increase
The head of Rio Tinto Iron Ore has forecast an increase in iron ore prices in the next round of international negotiations, due to get under way next month.
Chief executive Sam Walsh says while the Brazilians settled the price in the last round, Australia is the number two supplier in the world and is in a strong position this time.
"The first part of the negotiations is, in fact, setting the scene, particularly in relation to economics, GDP growth and obviously steel and iron ore usage," he said.

Mine expansion bond not enough: WWF
Traditional owners and conservationists have vowed to continue campaigning against expansion of the Northern Territory's McArthur River lead and zinc mine.
That is despite the Territory Government giving the green light for diversion of the tropical river, to allow mining of one of the world's largest ore deposits beneath the river bed.
Dr Stuart Blanch of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) says the $55 million bond will not be enough to safeguard the Gulf of Carpentaria.
"What can it do if there is major pollution spill into the McArthur?" he said.
"I have never heard any reasonable technical or engineering proposal that would say for $55.5 million or in that ballpark, this is how we can recapture lead and zinc or other acid or heavy metals that are escaped into the river that have been absorbed by fish or dugong, or turtle and polluted the sediment.

Frost hits cherry growers hardest
Severe frost has destroyed up to half of this season's fruit crop in Tasmania.
It has been confirmed that cherry growers have been hardest hit, with losses ranging from 30 to 80 per cent, while apple and apricot growers have also reported heavy losses.
Domestic shortages are now expected in the coming months after frost also decimated Victoria's Goulburn Valley crop.
And Gerald Ellis, from the Vineyards Association of Tasmania, says some grape growers expect to lose half this season's fruit.

US vows not to compete over Japanese beef market
The United States beef industry has pledged to try to expand the Japanese beef market, rather than take market share from Australia.
Australia is currently hosting beef producers from the United States, Canada, Mexico and New Zealand for the annual five nation beef talks.
The president of the US National Cattlemen's Beef Association, Mike John, says they would rather grow a contracted Japanese beef market than compete against Australia.
"I don't really look at it as a competitive issue, I think that the entire beef consumption is down in Japan - I mean regardless of where the beef comes from," he said.

Authorities monitor European bluetongue virus outbreak
Australian authorities are carefully watching an outbreak of the bluetongue virus in Europe.
Bluetongue is spread by biting insects and can kill infected livestock.
Richard Norris, from Western Australia's Department of Agriculture and Food, says while the virus also exists in Australia a new strain could affect Middle East trade.
He says the latest outbreak has affected more than 700 cattle and sheep on the borders of Belgium, Holland, Germany and France.
"It's mainly affected sheep but it's also made some cattle sick and a few of them have died," Mr Norris said.
"Now this is the first time it's been recorded with credibility that cattle have been sick with a particular strain of bluetongue.

Communities feel drought impact
A report has revealed 10 per cent of Queenslanders live in poverty and those in regional and remote areas are among the most vulnerable.
The study was carried out by the University of Queensland's Social Research Centre.
Jill Lang, from the Queensland Council of Social Service, says 400,000 people in the state are surviving on half the average weekly income.
"There are a number of reasons for this," she said.

Cloud juice headed for export market
Rainwater from Tasmania's King Island could soon become part of a Japanese tradition.
King Island Cloud Juice, as it is retailed, is currently being sought after to make the rice wine - sake.
Company director Duncan McFie says demand for the rainwater is increasing across the world and expansion is likely.
"I had this idea years ago that just as King Island Dairy has a tanker that drives around and picks up all the milk, I had this little cloud juice tanker in my head that drives around and picks up all the water," he said.

Boxer Bronco Johnson dies at 78
Australia has lost one of the last true boxing showmen, north Queenslander Don 'Bronco' Johnson, who died this week at the age of 78.
Bronco Johnson earned a reputation throughout Australia for his wild fighting style, his courageous rodeo riding and his Errol Flynn moustache.
In the 1950s and 1960s he led a travelling 10-man boxing and rodeo troupe, taking on all challengers.
Troupe member Harry Grogan says it was a tough way to make a living, but he thoroughly enjoyed working with 'Bronco'.
"Any time he fought he used to get the crowd in because they used to love him, the way he would swing at people and hit them from his knees," he said.

Parasitic wasps' project secures $4m
A research project into parasitic wasps has been awarded $4 million by the National Science Foundation in the United States.
Professor Andrew Austin from Adelaide University will lead the international research to examine and name the thousands of wasp species.
He says wasps are crucial for ecological balance and may be important biological control agents in the future.

Concerns govt regulations limiting mining investments
The Western Australian minerals exploration sector claims government regulations are costing the state billions of dollars in lost investments.
WA has recorded its lowest ever level of exploration spending, while other states, like New South Wales and South Australia, have almost doubled theirs.
Justin Wolawski, from the Association of Mining and Exploration Companies, says Western Australia has a reputation as a difficult place to do business due to native title and environmental constraints.
"The mineral exploration and mining industry takes up point zero three percent of the states land mass, it's a minuscule amount of the state," he said.
"But what's in front of mineral exploration and mining companies in some cases is approval of both houses of Parliament, approval from the Minister of Environment, and then further impediments alongside there.

Abalone farm keen to restock after virus
An abalone farm is attempting to get its business back on track after the discovery of a herpes-like virus on the south-west coast of Victoria earlier this year.
