Burning boat sends strong message to illegal fishers
An Indonesian fishing boat is being burnt in Darwin today - the 74th to be apprehended in Australian waters this year.
Earlier this year, the Navy seized the 'Harapan', which is an Indonesian type three ice boat, inside the Australian fishing zone boundary.
The 27 metre long boat could store up to 40 tonnes of fish, but this one was only carrying about 50 kilograms of fish such as snapper aided by GPS navigation.
The Australian Fisheries Management Authority says these boat burnings send a strong message to the owners in Indonesia, that illegal fishing will not be tolerated.
It has been set alight in a boat burn pit at Hudson Creek, near the busy East Arm Port of Darwin and will take all day to burn completely. Any metal remaining will be salvaged for cost recovery.

Gold mining company goes into administration
One of Western Australia's historic gold companies, Croesus Mining, has slipped into administration, despite record gold prices.
Hartley's mining expert Rob Brierley says it is disappointing for the many small shareholders in the Kalgoorlie-based Croesus and he is not sure whether the company will survive the overhaul from the administrators.
"It's a bit sad really, 80 years of continous operations at Norseman, they'll to continue to operate the mine, but obviously the company is going to be under financial duress," he said.
Meanwhile, a social divide is becoming evident in central Queensland where the coal mining boom is turning to gloom for many towns.
Attractive wages at Bowen Basin coal mines have enticed thousands of people from around Australia, pushing rental prices in small rural towns to Sydney and Melbourne levels.
Marion Callow, from Clermont's Commercial Hotel, says a basic wage will not cover the rent any more.
"The contractors are coming into towns to work for the mines and then the mines themselves are providing the cheap accommodation for their workers," she said.

Fox control program extended
The Tasmanian Government has extended its fox control program for another four years.
The move comes after an independent report found foxes do exist in Tasmania and immediate controls are needed.

Dingo wee proves successful in scaring off kangaroos
Perth-based researchers have stumbled on a successful, although unusual, way to frighten kangaroos - dingo wee.
A team from Curtin University believes kangaroos recognise the smell of their long-time predator, the dingo and steer clear.
They hope to isolate the chemical, to create a product that keeps roos away from crops.
Project manager Dr Michael Parsons says they first trialled the smell at a wildlife sanctuary and watched the kangaroos flee.
"She walked out of the bathroom with a tube of urine in an evaporative canister and as soon as she got about five metres from them, they looked at her and immediately fled ... and this was a whole mob of them," he said.

Wild pigs may be spreading sugar cane disease, says farmer
Sugar cane smut has now been confirmed on more than 20 farms in south-east Queensland.
The fungal disease was discovered for the first time in Queensland two weeks ago and the industry's exotic disease plant health plan is in force.
While there are now strict quarantine measures on the movement of people and plants, cane farmer Bruce Royan says wild pigs may be spreading the disease.
"It's obviously blown in with the wind or somebody else has been driving around the farm," he said.

Report highlights desire for change to wheat marketing
A new report on the future of wheat exports from Australia has backed calls for changes to the single desk.
Single Vision Grains Australia, a government-funded body, surveyed 27 industry groups from growers to exporters and grain marketers.
Its conclusions mirror other reports about the future of wheat marketing - most want to keep the single desk, but remove AWB's right to veto exports from other traders and bolster the powers of the Wheat Export Authority.
But the Grains Council, which represents around 30,000 growers, says Single Vision should not have carried out the survey in the first place.
Chairman Murray Jones says the council refused to take part when approached.
"For them to say that they're the peak body for the Australian grains industry is absolutely incorrect," Mr Jones said.
"Their press release comes out saying the Australian grains industry's calling for changes to single desk policy, now who's calling for it, are they calling for it?" he said.

Farm lobby group concerned over biosecurity laws
The New South Wales Farmers Association says it has found three major flaws with Australia's biosecurity legislation.
The farm body commissioned barrister Tom Brennan to identify which laws might be legally challenged, amid concern that communication between farmers and the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) has broken down.
Chairman of the association's quarantine committee, Peter Carter, says Mr Brennan's advice has raised a number of concerns.
"The first one is that the import risk analysis has no legal status, which is quite frightening and can be ignored by AQIS," Mr Carter said.
"Secondly, he found that there needs to be better definition of the way that the minister consults with AQIS, or doesn't consult with them, but it needs to be defined in law because at the moment there is a big hole in the law over that."

Hendra virus horse death concerns vets association
The Australian Veterinary Association (AVA) says it is concerned about the handling of the death of a horse in Queensland two weeks ago from the hendra virus.
The virus killed horse trainer Vic Rail and 17 of his horses in the mid 1990s.

McGauran backs livestock ID system
The Federal Agriculture Minister, Peter McGauran, has defended an audit of the National Livestock Identification System.
The Australian Beef Association (ABA) says the audit ordered by Mr McGauran in recent weeks, will not be independent, and will not solve problems inherent in the livestock traceback system.
ABA chair Linda Hewitt says there is no point checking the database is working, if the accuracy of information entered at the property and meatworks level is not checked.
Mr McGauran says the audit will be both independent and comprehensive.
"I can only say that this will be an independent assessment by the government of the day. The ABA is quite intemperate. They claim the NLIS is fundamentally flawed, not just the database," Mr McGauran said.

Drought forcing cattle evacuations from Channel Country
One of the nation's largest beef producers says it is moving nearly 1,000 head of cattle out of Queensland's drought-stricken Channel Country every week.
S. Kidman and Co produces beef for markets in Japan, the US and South-East Asia on properties on the Georgina and Diamantina Rivers and Cooper Creek.
Chief executive Greg Campbell says a moderate flood earlier this year was not enough to stop destocking.
"Throughout the Channel Country at the moment we're about 50 to 60 per cent stocked," he said.

Rain brings relief to WA farmers
There has finally been some rain relief in Western Australia, with falls along the western coast overnight.
Only marginal falls were recorded inland, with some grain growers faring better than others.
"By 6:00pm last night I'd had 20.2 millimetres and then overnight another 7.5mls, so for those few hours it was 27.7 and it's absolutely fantastic," John Williams from Bindoon said.
"Just so great to see all this rain after all this time. Those that have been waiting for the rain will be able to put their crops in and those that have dry sown, this will help them along just great."
Garth Cowald from West Canna says he had 4.5 millimetres of rain last night.
"We haven't sown any wheat yet, getting a bit late now, the ground is too dry. We haven't had hardly any rain now for three months. We have sown lupins and oats but it hasn't come up," Mr Cowald said.
"So with the costs now days, I think it's better to leave the seed and fertiliser in the shed and the chemicals and just take it from there."

Low demand reduces NT pig market
Contract pig shooters in the Northern Territory are selling off their hunting dogs because they do not have an export market this year.
More than 20 registered shooters around the town of Katherine cull hundreds of feral pigs during the dry season and ship the meat to Germany.
But this year demand and prices are so low, not a single pig will be going overseas.
Hunter Athol Schmidt says it is bad news for the environment, because without an export market it is too expensive to hunt.
"At the moment the stuff that's coming out of Queensland and northern NSW is just filling the pet food market," Mr Schmidt said.
"The prices down south they opened up at 60 cents per kilo, they tell me they've gone to 80 but you're still flogging a dead horse.

Commissioner to investigate bushfire practices
Concerns about bushfire prevention and recovery measures in Victoria will be investigated by the state's emergency services commissioner.
Commissioner Bruce Esplin has been meeting with farmers and other groups, who believe not enough fuel reduction burns were done before the Grampians bushfires in January.
Mr Esplin says the report will assess what progress has been made since his report on the 2003 Alpine fires.
"I made a lot of recommendations in that report, 148 recommendations in fact, and I think it's time that we put out a report to the community about what's happened, what's the progress on each of those recommendations, " Mr Esplin said.

Timbercorp branches out to compete with NZ imports
Agribusiness company Timbercorp is diversifying into the tomato business, in a bid to compete with imports.
It is to spend $25 million building Australia's biggest truss tomato glasshouse at Two Wells, north of Adelaide.
Chief executive Robert Hance says it will produce 5,000 tonnes of tomatoes for the domestic market, the same amount that is imported from New Zealand each year.

Qld farmers highlighting green thumbs
Queensland grain growers are introducing a set of environmental guidelines to show off their 'green' credentials.
Lobby group Agforce is collating a best management practice manual in the Fitzroy Basin, in central Queensland, with plans to roll it out across the nation.
Spokesman Kym Bremner says they want to prove to the Government and urban Australians that they are being pro-active and addressing problems.
"The uptake of zero till, while it's been fairly spectacular, is still something that people need to work on," Mr Bremner said

Egg industry seeks to boost sales
The egg industry has launched a push to get more people eating eggs, after figures show Australia has the lowest rate of consumption of eggs in the western world.
On average we eat 169 eggs each per year, a long way below the Japanese, who eat 350, or the Americans, who consume 260 eggs each.
James Kellaway from the Australian Egg Corporation also says that while Australians are offered a wider choice of eggs, most are buying cage industry products.
"Just over 80 per cent of Australia's production is represented in caged eggs and that has a price point attached to it which is relatively lower than that price point attached to barn-laid or free-range eggs," Mr Kellaway said.

Longest-running land claim now over
The longest-running land claim in the nation is being resolved today in the Gulf of Carpenteria, 700 kilometres south-east of Darwin.
Just over 21,000 hectares across the Sir Edward Pellew Islands, is being officially handed back to the Yanyuwa people, after 30 years of debate.
Many of the original claimants are not alive to see their dream come true, but 71-year-old Steve Johnson says the hand back provides an incentive for others to move back onto traditional lands.
"It's good to see that we are getting our island handed back after so long. There has been a number of deaths in the Yanyuwa and [other] clan groups, 130 all up in that time," Mr Johnson said.
"[But] I think it will make them feel a lot better, that they can move around more freely in their own country.
"The only thing that would be a factor now is the cost of fuel, petrol, diesel stuff like that to get out there.

Grain Council agenda baffles ex-president
Former Grains Council president Keith Perrett says the peak body is losing the confidence of growers and creating divisions in the industry.
Yesterday the council slammed a new survey calling for changes to the single desk for wheat exports, saying Single Vision Grains Australia had no authority to conduct it.
Mr Perrett headed the Grains Council between 2001 and 2005, but claims it is now failing to provide leadership.
He says he is baffled by its current agenda, which seems to be politically-driven.
"Certainly most growers that I speak to say 'what's going on here at the moment'," he said.
"It's a bit beyond me as to why they would be taking that line, you know the easy answer is to say 'well it's a bit of patch protection', I'm not sure what the outcomes are why they've come down the path they are.
"Certainly I'd be taking a different approach to the one that's being taken at the moment."

Corporation's decision may cost timber industry jobs
The timber industry says up to 2,000 jobs are under threat from the Australian Rail Track Corporation's decision to use concrete rather than timber sleepers to upgrade the Melbourne to Brisbane rail line.
The National Association of Forest Industries says saw mill operators were expecting to supply up to 400,000 timber sleepers a year for the next five years.
But the association's Catherine Murphy says they have now been told timber is no longer required.
"It's not just along the Murray there but it's the north coast of New South Wales and I understand sleepers are also produced in Queensland and Western Australia," she said.
"This is a specific market that many of these saw millers have invested $10 million, for example, over the past two years in upgrading their mills specifically to provide timber."

Farming practices blamed for looming mice plague
No-till farming practices and left over seed from last harvest are being blamed for a looming mice plague on South Australia's upper Eyre Peninsula.
Surveys have shown more than 4,000 mice per hectare, the highest number since 1995.
Unlike conventional seeding, sowing crops with the no-till method leaves one distinct furrow for mice to follow and burrow into to eat grain.
Buckleboo farmer Jim Hamlin says the mice are just another problem when they are already facing a cold, dry start to the season.
"Where some of the crops are up, they're chewing off leaves and in other places, where the crops are not up, they've dug under the ground and got the grain as well," he said.

Businesses suffer as dry conditions continue
Dry conditions on pastoral properties south-east of Alice Springs have taken their toll on businesses which service the area.
It has been four years since the region has had any decent rain and stock feed is scarce.
Rodney Mingel, who runs Mingel's Heli Service, has grounded one of three helicopters this season and stood down a pilot.
He says mustering work has been halved, due to the lack of rain and lower stock numbers.
"From now on through to September is really our busy period," he said.
"There's just not much happening, I mean people have done their work, work that they normally do towards the end of the year they've done at the beginning of the year.
"Cattle numbers are down, so there's not six paddocks to muster anymore there's one.

Murray River levels drop
There is concern about the state of the Murray River this winter.
River Murray Water says its storages are only 40 per cent full and has reduced river flows to protect current levels.
With a lack of rain across the catchment as well, parts of the river between Mildura and Swan Hill are only waist deep.
Colignan citrus grower and river boat enthusiast Robert Mansell says the river is as low as he has seen it at this time of year.
"It's really, really interesting," he said.

Rain enables farmers to finish sowing crops
Welcome rain over the grain belt in Western Australia this week has many farmers back out in the paddock to finish sowing crops.
The Western Australian Farmers Federation has surveyed its members and president Trevor De Landgrafft says that for many, the season is a long way behind, after one of the driest May and June periods on record.
"Forty per cent of the respondents have less than half of their crop in the ground," he said.
"Half of those people don't have any crop in at all.
"Sixty per cent of respondents have got more than half their crop in and two thirds of that number somewhere between 80 and one 100 per cent.
"We're saying we think about half the crop that has been sown is out of the ground."

Soft international demand blamed for drop in milk prices
Australia's largest milk processor has lowered the prices it will offer dairy farmers this year.
The move by Murray Goulburn to drop prices by 2.9 per cent follows a 5 per cent cut announced by New Zealand-based Fonterra.
The company's Ian MacAulay is blaming softer international demand.

Green light given to abalone farm
The first land-based abalone farm in New South Wales has been approved on the state's mid-north coast.
Native abalone is under threat from poaching and aquaculture is seen as a way of preserving numbers.
But local conservation groups fear the development could pollute coastal waters and destroy seagrass beds.
Graham Housefield from Australian Bounty Seafoods says he has done everything he can to deal with the concerns.
"I guess what it really comes down to is that the farm needs to have a pristine area because we need water that's as clean as possible and therefore we can't afford to do anything to harm the water from that area," he said.
"These animals are absolutely and totally reliant on having clean water."

Flower growers surprised at banned-seed list
Cut-flower growers are calling for more time to comment on draft changes to seed import regulations.
For the past two months, Biosecurity Australia has been reviewing the Permitted Seeds List.
But tropical flower growers, like Alan Carle, say the review has caught many growers by surprise.
"We are in a process, a review process to dramatically restrict the number of plants and seeds which may be brought into the country in the future," Mr Carle said.
"Effectively, it slams the door shut. We should all just band together and ask for a moratorium so we have time to consider and work in a constructive way with Biosecurity Australia and Quarantine to come up with a system which we are all happy with and doesn't create some sort of black market.
"I mean that's the worst thing that can happen to this country is to get things brought in without proper controls."

US cattle prices not expected to increase
US Agriculture Department officials say it will take years to recover from Japan's mad cow-related ban on beef and producers there should not expect to see massive price rises.
US Agriculture Department livestock analyst Ron Gustafson says Japan's expected reopening of its market to US beef after it completes audits of US plants next month, will not bring a huge upswing in US cattle prices.
Mr Gustafson says it will take years to sell pre-mad cow amounts of US beef to Japan, which only buys certain cuts anyway.
"We don't sell whole carcasses to the Japanese or South Koreans, or anyone ... we sell cuts that, largely, we don't have the large demand for here in the US - short ribs, plates and so-forth - the fattier items," he said.

Drug busting wasps still some time away
Wasps might be known for their bite, but their highly-tuned sense of smell could make them the sniffer dogs of the future.
Trials are under way in the United States to train tiny wasps to detect chemicals.
Dr Andrew Austin from the University of Adelaide says the idea is feasible and wasps are quick learners, but he can not see them replacing dogs any time soon.
"They've been able to demonstrate that you can take these wasps and you can train them to recognise that particular chemical," he said.
"It's a long way from that to actually using this particular wasp in a commercial sense, where you could actually use them as drug busting sort of wasps.

Hotline to help men cope with depression
The impact of the drought has prompted Beyondblue to establish a national hotline specifically to help men deal with depression.
Chairman Jeff Kennett says men from country areas are more likely to suffer from depression, but are less likely to admit the problem.
He says the helpline will provide information, treatment and where to get help.
"Unfortunately depression is very prevalent throughout rural Australia and particularly among young men," he said.
"So what we hope with this Beyondblue information line is to give men the capacity wherever and however isolated their environment may be for the price of a local call to seek direction and help as to what to do in overcoming their depressive illness."
The hotline number, which will be in operation from July 1 is 1300 224 636.
WA-based rural financial counsellor Sue Smith says farmers are traditionally bad at managing stress and many cases are ignored.
She says one of the telltale signs is a change in behaviour.
"It's no wonder that people are feeling really stressed at the moment," she said.
"The first sign is in the body, somebody will start to feel tired, they'll get headaches, their body will start to ache.
"Sometimes it's other people that notice that they become quiet irritable, they may withdraw from their family and friends.

WEA chairman's term extended
The chairman of the Wheat Export Authority (WEA), Tim Besley, will head the regulator for another six months.
Questions have been raised about the authority's effectiveness, in the wake of the AWB scandal.

Sheep chemical declared unsafe
Access to a chemical commonly used to treat flystrike and lice in sheep will be severely restricted after tests showing it is unsafe.
The review of Diazinon was prompted earlier this year after farm workers complained of headaches and in some cases vomiting when using the chemical.
Joan Ashton from the Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority says other chemicals are more costly, but human safety is the priority.
"There's really no way you can mitigate what we think is an unacceptable risk to workers," she said.
"Australia's not the only one looking at Diazinon, there's been a range of reviews that have been going on worldwide and it has progressively been discontinued in other countries, as well, along similar lines and for similar reasons for concern, as we've identified here in Australia."

Ag pilots dispute crash statistics findings
New research from the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) says agricultural pilots do not get enough training and are overly represented in crash statistics.
The research, which looked at wire strike accidents where planes hit power lines or other wires, found 65 per cent of low level flying accidents happened in farming.
Head of the Aerial Agricultural Association, Phil Hurst, disputes the findings and says the industry has improved its safety record.

Economic forecaster criticised for livestock price estimates
The Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) is again under fire for its forecasts, this time for livestock prices.
Analysts say meat price estimates are probably too low, while production forecasts for beef and lamb are too high.
Bill Cordingley from Rabobank says the beef figures have not taken poor seasons properly into account.

Foster's to sell two wineries
Foster's is set to sell two of its wineries, including the iconic Barossa Seppeltsfield Winery in South Australia.
Also on the market is Rosemount's Denman site in the Hunter Valley and most of its Penfolds site at Nuriootpa in the Barossa Valley.

Honeymoon mine proposal meets more opposition
The proposed Honeymoon uranium mine near Broken Hill has been met with more opposition, with submissions on the project closing today.
Friends of the Earth says the South Australian Government will be going back on an election promise if it allows the mine to go ahead.
Anti-nuclear campaigner Joel Catchlove says the mine is a risky, short-term operation.
"By supporting it, it puts the Rann Government in quite a difficult situation. Because as there simply isn't a mine at Honeymoon at the moment they're both threatening to break their binding SA platform for government and also it goes against their election promises," he said.
"If you've got a four to six years of operation yet it could be permanent ground water contamination in that area."

Mining company hopes to set up rare earth mine in NT
A Northern Territory mining company hopes to have a rare earth mine up and running within five years.
The rare element is a key ingredient for new technology including computer screens, rechargeable batteries and environmentally-friendly hybrid vehicles.
Arafura Resources has already found an 18.6 million tonne deposit about 130 kilometres north of Alice Springs, but managing director Alistair Stephens says they hope to find more in coming months to meet growing demand.

Tax Office focuses on timber plantation records
Companies involved in managed investment schemes are under pressure to get crops in the ground before midnight to meet end of financial year deadlines.
Staff from the Australian Tax Office have been hovering around timber plantations in the far north of Western Australia to confirm paddock plantings match the accounting books.
Tom Cullity from Tropical Forestry Services says his company had a last minute scare with the Tax Commissioner at the door and the discovery that two hectares of indian sandalwood was not accounted for.
"Bearing in mind that the Tax Department was coming up today we thought really we'd better do something," he said.
"I came up and had a look at it and there was obviously a gap there, and said 'hey boys what are we going to do about this' and they all said unprintable words and off we went.

Shareholders show support for dairy group
Shareholders have voted down a push to disband Western Australia's only representative dairy group.
A resolution was put forward late last year to dissolve the organisation, amid claims it had failed to have an impact on the struggling sector.
Following yesterday's vote, director Jim Fremantle says there now needs to be an overhaul of the processing sector.

Rice market regulation ends
Regulation of the domestic rice market will end tomorrow.
Until now all rice grown in New South Wales has had to be sold through the single desk held by Sunrice or the Ricegrowers Co-operative.

Frost damage may push up avocado costs
The price of avocados could be set to rise, with significant frost damage to crops in the Murray Valley.
Freezing conditions a fortnight ago has caused fruit to drop off the trees.
John Eastoe from Mildura Agricultural Contractors says he has lost 60 per cent of his crop, which had an estimated valued of more than half a million dollars.
"We were sitting on probably our best has crop ever, we've been lifting our yields for the last three years but as you can see it's all on the ground," he said.

Katherine School of the Air celebrates anniversary
There will be big celebrations in the Top End town of Katherine tonight, as the School of the Air marks its 40th anniversary.
These days the school serves 220 students.
But in 1966 the first teacher in charge, Ron Smith, began with eight students on HF radio.
"It really made me realise that so much depends on the family," he said.
"They need a tremendous amount of encouragement and support. It worked and I was talking to a family in Darwin and their lad was one of the early students, and they have gone on and travelled overseas and studied overseas.

Mail contractor finally quits 400km mail run
It is a bittersweet day for one outback mail contractor,
After almost 40 years of servicing properties in south-west Queensland, Cecil Russell is retiring
Since 1968 Mr Russell has been making the 400 kilometres round trip from Augathella to Carnarvon Station twice a week and says the scenery is the best part of the job.
"I love the country up there and that's probably why I've been doing it so long, it's a for ever changing sort of thing, seasons change and yes there's a lot of wildflowers at times," he said.
"Every day you get to see a different mob of brumby horses, see quite a few wild dogs and I enjoy just looking at the cattle as I go and that sort of thing.

Rock lobster fishermen to hang up pots
Rock lobster fishermen in Western Australia will today pull their pots for the last time this season.
Most believe this year's catch was down slightly, but prices are the best they've seen in years.
Dongara fisherman Greg Cole says he will enjoy his break over the next four months.
"We're finishing on $32 a kilo which is a lot better than how we started," he said.

Rodeo circuit veterans set for reunion
Some of the nation's golden oldies of the rodeo circuit are heading for a reunion
in western Queensland this weekend.
Veteran bull and bronc riders will meet in Injune, north of Roma, to celebrate the town's return to the professional rodeo circuit for the first time in 33 years.
While they will not be competing, local association president Murray Douglas says they will be enjoying a beer and a catch-up.
"They're coming from all over Australia and they'll be telling a few old stories no doubt about how they used to do it," he said.

Third dairy company announces milk price reductions
Victorian dairy processor Warrnambool Cheese and Butter company has become the third dairy company to announce a drop in its opening prices for milk.
Processors Bonlac and Murray Goulburn announced price reductions for their suppliers earlier this week.

Retiring wine group head predicts industry turnaround
The retiring chairman of the Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation is predicting a turnaround in the wine industry within the next four years.
David Brownhill steps down today after six years in his government-appointed role.
With grape growers struggling with poor prices and an oversupply, Mr Brownhill does not, however, expect much improvement in the short term.
"I believe in two years' time the light will start to shine at the end of the tunnel, [it] doesn't mean that it's coming out of the tunnel in two years' time, but in four years' time I believe that you'll be right out of the tunnel and then you'll most probably find we'll be a little bit short of red wine for example," he said.

Food safety standards need continual improvement, say scientists
The safety of the food that we eat is emerging as a crucial global trade issue, which can open or block access to markets.
Scientists at the Australian Food Safety Centre say the three main concerns are chemical residues, foreign items in prepared foods and pathogens such as bacteria and viruses.
Professor Tom Ross says pathogenic outbreaks occur at all levels of the food chain from the paddock to the plate and growers, and processors, need to continue to improve safety standards.
He says E. coli bug in the 1980s is an example of how potentially fatal contaminants continue to evolve.
"Twenty years ago that organism had never been seen before," he said.

AWB vows to fight any kickback lawsuits
Wheat exporter AWB says it will fight any legal action launched by American farmers in the wake of the oil-for-food scandal.
Reports suggest the company could face a billion-dollar lawsuit claiming US wheat growers lost trade with Iraq when AWB paid almost $300 million in kickbacks to Saddam Hussein's regime.
The ABC understands the initial case may cover just 20 or so farmers but has the potential to see thousands of US and Canadian farmers join them.
If the action is successful, it could see AWB forced to make a payout triple the value of the kickbacks.
But US Wheat Associates knows nothing of the proposed legal suit at this stage.
AWB spokesperson Peter McBride says AWB would fight any such legal suit.
"Such actions are ill-conceived and if any action is formally brought against AWB we will vigorously defend," he said.
The ABC understands that it is hard to argue the case that US farmers were hurt by AWB kickbacks, because the US had sanctions against trading with Iraq. 

Single desk challenge
AWB has challenged the growing number of proposals calling for changes to the single desk export system.
National wheat pool manager David Johnston has told a public debate in Victoria that AWB will accept the outcome from the oil-for-food inquiry.
But he says if AWB's export monopoly or its veto over grain export applications is removed, wheat growers will be the losers.
"The bulk veto, I think, is a core component of the single desk as we know it and if we have people wanting to send wheat into Indonesia or Malaysia or any of our core markets you'll have Australian wheat competing with Australian wheat," he said.

Electoral boundary change bad for voters: Anderson
The National Party has accused the Australian Electoral Commission of taking the easy way out, by scrapping the federal seat of Gwydir in northern New South Wales.
With a shift in population, New South Wales is required to lose an electorate to accommodate a new seat in Queensland.
The commission wants to merge the seat of Gwydir with Parkes, which will cover almost half the state.
But the retiring Member for Gwydir, former deputy prime minister John Anderson, says the move is a tragedy for country voters.
"I think it's appallingly bad to see people face the prospect of being in a seat that's over twice the size that it is now which makes it far harder for people to access the local member," he said.
"This means one less country voice in Canberra and a lesser chance still of being represented around the Cabinet table.

NFF 'lives in hope' of trade talks breakthrough
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) is confident there is still life in World Trade Organisation (WTO) talks, despite another failure to reach agreement on agriculture over the weekend.
United States and European negotiators went into the talks saying they were prepared to move on farm reforms.
However, negotiators in Geneva say those nations have failed to match their rhetoric with action.
An agreement on agriculture is the crucial first step in securing broader trade deals around industrial goods and services.
Trade policy manager with the NFF, Scott Mitchell, says while it is been a frustrating process is not over yet.
"WTO is the main game," Mr Mitchell said.
"We live in hope that ministers will go home and reflect on what's happened here this week and will realise that we do have a narrow window of opportunity to make global trading rules better for a long time.

Cold start to winter cuts rainfall
The freezing start to winter across southern Australia could be causing the ongoing dry weather conditions.
In normal years, cold air from the Southern Ocean collides with warm air from central Australia resulting in cut-off lows, which bring rainfall.
But this year, the systems are not as strong.
Dr Peter McIntosh, from the Marine Atmospheric Research Centre, says that is because it is colder inland.
"We've speculated a little bit recently about what might be causing these cut-off lows to decrease in intensity," he said.
"We think it is a decrease in the north-south temperature gradient.

Coroner blames bushfire on powerline
An electricity provider in New South Wales has been blamed for causing a major bushfire in the state's central west two years ago.
The deputy state coroner has found the fire started near Parkes, when a tree touched a Country Energy powerline.
The 2004 fire burnt 6,000 hectares, causing the death of 690 sheep and the destruction of thousands of hectares of unharvested crops on 28 farms.
Craig Ward says he is relieved the four-day inquest quashed rumours that his farming machinery sparked the blaze.
"I just gave evidence that I wasn't in the vicinity of where the fire started," he said.
"Through the GPS system on the harvester it plots every two seconds where the harvester has been over the period of time your harvesting."
Mr Ward says he was frustrated by the approach of Country Energy to the trial, which tried to prove his harvester sparked the blaze.

Ord River Irrigation Scheme expansion approved
The long-awaited second stage development of the Ord River Irrigation Scheme in Western Australia's far north has been given the green light.
Tenders have been called by the WA Government, which has settled environmental and native title issues surrounding the development.
The expansion of the Ord River Irrigation Scheme will make 16,000 hectares of irrigated farmland available.
The Government says it is seeking expressions of interest for development of between 7,000 and 16,000 hectares of land.
Resources Minister John Bowler says land could be available for planting as soon as 2008.
"We believe we can quadruple the amount of hectares placed under agriculture in irrigation," he said.
"This will make the Ord Valley one of the most significant agricultural areas in Australia."

Nurse practitioners scheme upsets doctors
Rural doctors in Tasmania claim they are being devalued by the introduction of nurse practitioners in remote areas.
Following the lead of other states, the Tasmanian Government will allow nurses to prescribe drugs and undertake some of the traditional tasks of doctors to fill shortages.
But the president of Rural Doctors Tasmania, Eric Calquoun, says nurses should remain an integral part of GP-led health care teams and not be allowed to practice independently.
"I think this is the thin edge of the wedge with this," he said.
"We're talking about prescribing major drugs, the Poisons Acts regulations are being modified so they can prescribe morphine for palliative care nurses.

Managed investment schemes under review
Concerns are emerging over the shift in managed investment schemes (MIS) from forestry and vineyards to broader agriculture.
Plantings of walnuts and avocados are among those now being offered to investors.
Rob Dalton, from Avocados Australia, says he is concerned by the push, which could massively distort the market.
"Reviews of MISs have indicated that the investors are in there primarily for the tax deduction and they have much less concern with profitability at the end of the project," he said.
"Whereas the normal farmer is in there for a profit and a long-term, sustainable profit.
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran is also concerned about the impact of MISs.
"When they start going into wine grapes and citrus and avocadoes where there is well-established Australian industries, that is of enormous concern," he said.

WA farmers back single wheat desk
The Western Australian Farmers Federation has called for the single desk wheat marketing system to be kept, even if AWB does not operate it.
Despite claims it is not a policy turnaround, it is the first time the federation has appeared to have reservations about AWB's future management of the single desk.
President Trevor de Landgrafft says the power of veto must stay with the single desk, but who manages it has come under scrutiny.

Feedlot demand outstrips grain production
Queensland feedlot owners are being told they may have to buy grain to feed cattle from Western Australia, if local production does not increase.
The Department of Primary Industries says demand for feed grains like barley, sorghum and wheat is expected to outstrip local supplies five out of every 10 years.
Kym McIntyre says feedlots already consume about 2 million tonnes of grain a year, with a further 1 million tonnes likely to be needed over the next five years.

Feral pigs destroy Ingham crops
Farmers in north Queensland say they are being overwhelmed by feral pigs.
Ingham cane farmer Tony Palmas believes the devastation of cyclone Larry could have forced many pigs out of their usual haunts to find food.
Mr Palmas says he has lost crops worth up to $20,000.
He says shooting the pigs is not working and there is no fruit available to use in traps.
"We used to get bananas from north like Innisfail and Tully but for the moment there's no bananas coming from there and there's no mangoes or anything like that," he said.

Locust fears prompt chemicals buy-up
Following warnings Western Australia is facing a huge locust plague this spring, the State Government has allocated more than $3 million towards the purchase of chemicals to control plagues.
Minister for Agriculture Kim Chance says if untreated, locusts could cost the state more than $100 million.
It is thought big summer rains have contributed to heavy egg laying this year.
Mr Chance says farmers have to prepare for major damage.
"It's not, in terms of area, quite as big as the spring 2000 infestation was, which covered about, looks to me on the map, two to three times the areas," he said.

VegMachine gives farmers eye in the sky
Landholders across the northern rangelands of Australia can now use satellite monitoring to keep track of environmental changes on their properties.
The new system, which is called VegMachine, has been trialed across 80,000 square kilometres in Western Australia, the Northern Territory and Queensland.
NT Government researcher Luke Peel wants to see the free computer software program used more widely.
"It gives you a birdseye view of the property," he said.
"The idea is the mystery of satellite imagery, what it can say and do is being exposed back.
"It still hasn't got to the point where we can actually work out kilograms per hectare on the ground.
"But, it certainly gives an idea of how productivity can be related to use of the resources or trapping of the resources available.
"Whether it's the actual vegetation, the soils or the nutrients in the soil."

Lachlan CMA outlines tender process
The Lachlan Catchment Management Authority (CMA) has outlined how the tender process will work for part of its latest round of incentive funding. The latest round opened last month and will close at the end of this month. Kieran Hawker, from the Lachlan CMA, says the tender process will bring a positive outcome for the environment and producers.

Crop growth slow across the region
The district agronomist with the Department of Primary Industries, Jan Edwards, says frosts in Cowra have seen germination of wheat and canola crops slow down. Ms Edwards says weeds will be a big problem as a lot of crop was dry sown and so weeds will emerge with the crops. This will be similar to last year. 

Truck hits mob of sheep
A warning to motorists across the region. A truck hit a mob of 5,000 sheep near Condobolin, killing 15 lamb wethers yesterday morning. Police say the drover was moving the stock on the West Wyalong Road south of Condobolin when they were hit by the concrete truck. Police says it is believed the truck driver did not take notice of stock moving signs. The driver is to be issued with an infringement notice for failing to give way to stock.

Draft chicken meat import ruling worries industry
The chicken meat industry says a decision to allow imports into Australia could pose an unnecessary risk to consumers.
In a draft import risk analysis, Biosecurity Australia recommends allowing uncooked chicken meat into the country, as long as exporting countries can prove they are free of diseases, including bird flu.
But Dr Andreas Dubs, from the Australian Chicken Meat Federation, is questioning whether Australia can be certain about another country's disease status.
"That is not a simple matter," he said.
"It really comes down to the confidence that we can have with the systems in place which in the past I suppose has been shown to be somewhat questionable."
While Australian quarantine officers usually double-check disease free claims from other countries, some say that is not always a guarantee.
Peter Scott, from the Australian Veterinary Poultry Alliance, says authorities rely on getting accurate information from producers.
"Regulatory authorities can only go on the information provided to them and in some cases that may not be accurate," Mr Scott said.
"We do see overseas quite a bit of product moving through countries.
"In other words, while you believe you're getting product from a particular country it may be coming in via another country."

Animal-based fertilisers threaten BSE status: vet
Tasmania's chief vet says Australia's status as being free of mad cow disease (BSE) could be threatened by the indiscriminate use of animal-based pasture fertilisers.
A number of cattle deaths from botulism in Tasmania have been attributed to the use of poultry litter as a fertiliser.
Dr Rod Andrewarthur says although it is a legal product, the litter must not be used before the end of the official withholding period to ensure cattle do not ingest any lingering animal protein.
He says under BSE protocols, no animal protein can be fed to cattle.
"We sell our meat to the world as a premium because we are free of diseases like mad cow disease," he said.
"We are under audit from other countries like the European Union to make sure that we've got all the checks and safeguards in place prevent the development of the disease.

Processing delays force saleyard's NLIS overhaul
Processing delays of up to 24 hours have forced Australia's biggest saleyards to overhaul its National Livestock Identification System (NLIS) infrastructure.
With 11,000 cattle on offer today, new in-pen scanning is being put to the test at the Roma Saleyards in Queensland.
A year after NLIS became mandatory in the state, the saleyards' board is scrapping two run-through scanners worth $270,000.
While they read tags with 99 per cent efficiency, large volumes of cattle mean even minor misreads could cause huge disruptions.
Brisbane-based company Livestock Link has been contracted to pick up any missing tags and non-reader tags more efficiently, by pre-scanning cattle before sales in pens.

Ethics campaigners push for teminator gene ban
Gene ethics campaigners are lobbying the Federal Government to ban the development of terminator technology in Australia.
The process would stop seed from breeding naturally, forcing farmers to buy new stocks each year instead of growing their own.
More than 10,000 people have signed a petition claiming genetic engineering companies will have monopoly power if the technology is introduced.
The Government has said it will accept development applications on a case-by-case basis.
However, Bob Phelps from the GeneEthics Network says that is not acceptable.
"There's clearly strong public sentiment that the terminator is not acceptable," he said.
"We're submitting those petitions to the federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran and we're saying to the Australian Government we want you to align the Australian Government policy with the global view that it's unacceptable and that the global ban on terminator should remain."

VFF pushes for single wheat desk changes
The Victorian Farmers Federation (VFF) has joined growing calls for changes to the single desk for wheat exports, in the wake of the oil-for-food Inquiry.
Under its plan, wheat exporter AWB Limited and AWB International would be split, with international wheat sales returned to farmer control.
The VFF will seek endorsement for the proposal from the Grains Council of Australia later this month.
VFF grains group president Ian Hastings says the plan addresses concerns about governance of the system, and payments to growers from the national wheat pool.
"We're talking about separation of AWB International and making sure that AWB International continues to have the legislative monopoly for exports of wheat," Mr Hastings said.

Fodder exports demand raises local prices
A booming export fodder market is good news for growers but farmers looking to feed livestock in Australia are facing high prices and short supply.
Lucerne prices have almost doubled since November to around $300 a tonne, while hay prices are up between $30 and $40 a tonne.
Colin Peace, from the Fodder Industry Association, says drought in the US and Canada is helping to boost exports, at the expense of the domestic market.
"Those two markets often clash for supply so I think you could anticipate that certainly continuing," he said.
"There are always opportunities for stocks that are destined for export to be diverted for domestic demand.

AWGA seeks unified wool industry vision
There are calls today for a single vision for the wool industry, uniting research, development and commerical operations to pull it out of the current slump.
The Australian Wool Growers Association (AWGA) says the industry's four main bodies - Australian Wool Innovation, Australian Wool Services, the wool testing authority, and wool exchange - are too inward-looking and duplicate services.
AWGA chairman, Martin Oppenheimer, says industry leaders should follow the lead of the sheepmeat industry, which turned its fortunes around with a strategic plan 10 years ago.
"We've got many different grower-owned or funded companies and they're all heading off in their own directions," he said.
"They've got different strategies.

Truck crash prompts stock movements warning
Police in New South Wales are warning drivers to be more careful on country roads, after a crash involving a cement truck and a mob of 5,000 sheep.
The mob was being run along a stock route in the state's central-west.
Detective Senior Constable Andrew McGrath says police believe the driver ignored stock warning signs.
"A vehicle travelling on a road about 15 kilometres from Condobolin collided with a mob of sheep that were being driven along the road, with 15 fatalities," he said.
"The driver of the truck I believe will be issued with an infringement notice for failing to give way to stock.
"Because the conditions have been so dry there are a lot of mobs moving around on the roads so people should be wary when they are travelling on country roads.

Nullabor pastoralists granted rent subsidies
Pastoralists on the Nullarbor who are suffering through drought conditions have been offered a sweetener by the West Australian Government.
They have been told they are not eligible for exceptional circumstances funding, but the Government will contribute $80,000 towards pastoral lease rents and agriculture protection rates.
Pastoralist Rod Campbell says the money is welcome but pastoralists still believe they should be eligible for EC funds.
"We're mystified about the criteria etc but I think the Minister's addressing that very nicely," he said.

Inquiry likely to recommend geosequestration: researcher
Researchers believe a federal Parliament inquiry will help find funding for more projects to stop greenhouse gases from coal, oil and gas fields entering the atmosphere.
The House of Representatives Science and Innovation Committee will investigate the benefits and risks of geosequestration, which is capturing carbon dioxide from mining and storing it underground for millions of years.
Trials are being carried out in Victoria's Otway Basin and off the Western Australian coast.
Dr Peter Cook, from the Co-operative Research Centre for Greenhouse Gas Technologies, says studies are making progress.
"We're very confident that that inquiry is going to endorse the use of this technology as one of the options for decreasing CO2 emissions," he said.

Wine grape ethanol trial under way
A 12-month trial producing ethanol from wine grapes has begun in South Australia.
Tarac Technologies in the Barossa Valley currently distills alcohol from winery waste.
The company will supply South Australian Farmers Fuel with 100,000 litres of biofuel over the next 12 months.
Spokesman Chris Zajac says it remains to be seen if the process can be economically viable.
"The reason we've decided to run the trial is to basically see how it performs against other ethanols in the marketplace," he said.

Hayes to head international wine body
An Australian has been named president of the peak international body representing winemakers and grapegrowers from 42 nations.
Peter Hayes will head up the International Organisation for Wine and Vine for the next three years.
The organisation sets industry standards and regulations for all member countries
Mr Hayes, a director and former chief executive of the Grape and Wine Research Development Council, says he was taken aback by his appointment.
"I find it a bit surprising quite frankly, but I think it is a sign of the times," he said.

Consumers switch to Homebrand products
New figures show Homebrand products like milk, sugar and butter already account for more than 50 per cent of sales through the major supermarkets.
Frozen and canned Homebrand vegetables and dried fruits are also becoming more popular, according to research by accountancy firm KPMG.
Food processors are starting to feel the pressure, as supermarkets aim to fill one-third of their shelves with their own labels.
KPMG's Adrian Arundell says the processing sector will shrink, as other brands disappear.
"Some of them are fighting head on against it, some of them are actually working with it," he said.

Tin mill's closure to force can imports
In a further blow for the manufacturing industry, tinned fruit and vegetable processors will have to import cans from next year, after the closure of Australia's only tin mill.
High iron ore prices have lead BlueScope Steel to shut its Port Kembla mill.
That will force canneries to either import tin or look for alternative packaging.
The head of the Food and Grocery Council, Dick Wells, says increased costs are putting manufacturing under a lot of pressure.
"People need to be aware that it's tough all the way and there's no easy life here," he said.
"If we're not innovative in this country in looking for ways to take costs out of the structure and produce products that consumers see additional benefits in, then there won't be a future."

Organic farmers eye overseas markets
The United States, Europe and South-East Asia are potential markets for Australian-grown organic products, according to a report launched last night.
The report by the Rural Industries and Development Corporation looks at the demographics of consumers, and what drives them to buy organic food.
Andre Leu, from the Organic Federation of Australia, says in the long-term, China will be a major market, although Australia will struggle to compete with its domestic production.
"The latest figures that we have from China show that their industry is worth $US8 billion, which makes them one of the largest organic markets in the world," he said.

Farmers dispute Costello's federalism reform plans
The New South Wales Farmers' Association is backing Federal Treasurer Peter Costello in his criticism of Australia's three-tiered system of government, but does not agree with his plans to change it.
Mr Costello has triggered national debate on federalism, by wanting to wrestle all responsibility for utilities and the economy from the state governments, reducing them to branch offices.
Mal Peters, from the association, says giving more power to Canberra is not the answer, and is calling for full-scale reform of Australia's system of government.
"Any further centralisation of power into New South Wales is not good," he said.
"I mean the closer the government gets to the people the better the government is, and that's well recognised by all players in the state and federal spheres.

'Iron Boomerang' plans onshore iron ore processing
The resources sector is investigating a $55 billion proposal to process iron ore in Australia from 2011.
The 'Iron Boomerang' would be a privately-funded 3,000 kilometre railway to link iron ore deposits in Western Australia with coal fields in north Queensland's Bowen Basin.
Blast furnaces to be build at either end of the tracks would produce pig iron for the export market.
An international trade delegation is touring the town of Bowen today to investigate the project.
Shane Condon, from Project Iron Boomerang, says supply chain savings alone could be worth $2 billion per year.
"When trains run empty and ships are coming back from China, or in the Pilbarra, or in the coal fields of Queensland, the return trip for these giant empty trains and ships is 45 per cent of the total trip cost and that is highly inefficient and using fuels unnecessarily," he said.

City vet students try country practice
Veterinary students in Western Australia have traded the dogs and cats of city practices for a stint on a remote cattle property in the Pilbara region.
About 1,600 kilometres from Perth, Warrawagine Station is a long way from home for two vet students, who have never done any work with cattle before.
But student Kate Louden says six weeks on 1 million acre station is a unique experience.
"I didn't realise quite how isolated the station is - 300 kilometres from the nearest shop," she said.
"We've been mustering so we've been moving the yards and drafting the cattle from different blocks.
"[We've] been up in the plane and the chopper a few times so it's been great.

Trucking industry looks to recruit foreign drivers
The trucking industry wants to start employing migrant workers, as driver shortages and an ageing workforce continue to cause problems.
Current skilled migrant visas do not allow for truck drivers but the Australian Trucking Association (ATA) is confident it can get the industry reclassified as a skilled occupation.
The ATA's Damien MacFarlane says it is a worldwide problem, and Australia will face competition from other countries hoping to recruit drivers.
"You'll find the United States and the United Kingdom are currently facing the same challenge," he said.
"There's many drivers being poached from Australia and have gone to either the United Kingdom or the United States to drive.
"It's fine to say let's go and get migrant drivers, where are you going to get them from? And that's going to be the challenge." 

Dry conditions see live sheep exports jump
Dry seasonal conditions in Western Australia have seen a massive jump in live sheep exports from Fremantle.
More than 330,000 sheep were shipped out last month alone.
John Edwards, from the WA Livestock Exporters Association, says there is a direct link between the increase and the weather.
"I guess farmers have sort of looked ahead of themselves as to availability of feed stocks on farm and very little paddock feed," he said.
"They've most probably made the decision to sell sheep early.
"Possibly we've seen a lot of sheep come out now rather than in the spring when they traditionally shear and sell off shears."
Meanwhile, easing cattle prices in the east are providing northern WA producers with competition in the live export trade.
Tony Cooling, from Landmark in Broome, says Queensland producers are now selling stock overseas.
"Queensland prices have come back a bit, so live export is now competing with the domestic market over there," he said.

'Beef only' cattle granted entry to Qld
Queensland has opened its borders to cattle from Victoria and the BJD control zone in New South Wales, as long as it's classed as "beef only".
The state had previously banned cattle due to concerns over the disease bovine Johne's.
Cattle which have not been run with dairy cows for five years, or grazed on land which has run dairy cattle within 12 months, will meet the classification.
Michael McCormack, from the Cattle Council, says it's a successful outcome.
"Especially for southern producers it's a good news story," he said.

Canada continues mad cow tests
Canadian authorities are continuing tests on a suspected sixth case of mad cow disease (BSE).
The cow was born before feed bans were put in place in 1997, and was discovered under new surveillance programs.
Final tests are due next week.

Frost hits Riversun's US exports
A company exporting citrus fruit to the United States says shipments are likely to drop 20 per cent this season, due to frost damage in the Murray Valley, Riverland and Riverina.
Riversun chairman Peter Walker says supermarkets in the US are aware of the damage to the Victorian and South Australian crops, but he is confident sales will not be affected.
"It's one of the transparencies that Riversun has," he said.
"It goes out and tells the customer base that we have procedures and policies in place and it's adhering to them.
"If it's minus two for more than four hours properties are put into suspension until they are assessed to see if there is any damage on that property, so we've explained that to supermarkets and they are all still on board." 

Dairy farmers form collective bargaining group
Tasmanian dairy farmers who supply food giant National Foods have formed the state's first collective bargaining group.
About 30 farmers have come together to negotiate future supply and price contracts.
The chairman of the group, Kem Perkins says the move was inevitable.
"It's the only way we could go to negotiate a price because under the rules and the law these days you can't negotiate price as an individual," he said.
"You can't even put in on the agenda when you have a suppliers' group meeting so the way we've set it up ... means that we can talk to any company, negotiate with any company and we can take on board any suppliers that conform to the conditions."
One of the first jobs for the bargaining group will be to negotiate extra time for next season's price talks.

Renewable fuel plant nears completion
Work on the nation's biggest renewable fuel plant in Darwin is almost complete.
Natural Fuels Australia will import Malaysian palm oil to produce biodiesel later this year.
Charles Darwin University was commissioned to compare traditional diesel with a 20 per cent biodiesel blend.
Researcher Mark Thiele says emissions were reduced.
"Carbon dioxide emissions went up slightly but primarily because of the reduction in hydro carbon and carbon monoxide," he said.
"We also didn't actually notice very much difference in power or torque.
"Particularly at the 20 per cent blend, which is what we were testing, was only about 1 per cent."
But Mr Thiele says it is not clear how sustainable it will be to import palm oil.
"From a sustainability perspective it's probably a little bit more complicated," he said.
"We have to look at the whole cycle of biodiesel production and the feed stock.
"It was really outside the scope of the research work that we did." 

Mary River dam decision outrages farmers
Farmers near Gympie remain outraged with the Queensland Government, despite its decision to scale back the size of a proposed new dam on the Mary River.
Premier Peter Beattie initially planned a 660,000 megalitre dam, which would have consumed almost 1,000 properties.
But he now says a smaller dam will be built, with the resumption of 500 properties.
Under the three-stage plan, the dam wall would be raised if more water is needed in 2035.
But locals at a public meeting to hear the details were furious, saying they will be left in limbo for 30 years.
"I've been living here 30 years and been waiting to retire," one said.
"I'd been retired one week when he dropped this bombshell."
Another resident said: "Some people in stage one will get bought out there's no doubt if they proceed, and so they've divided the community even more.
"And they left these people in stage two to whither on the vine."

Competition will cut farmers' market share: study
A new report says in the next 10 years Australian farmers will lose market share to developing countries like China, Brazil and India.
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the United Nations have compared 15 commodities.
They have found that as developing nations increase production and become more competitive, countries like the US, EU and Australia will lose out in world agricultural trade.
Australian exports of sugar, beef, rice and pigmeat will be hardest hit, with less impact on wheat and poultry.
Trade analyst Peter Gallagher says although world trade rules will play a part, global export competition is on the rise.
"The world is not beating a path to our door looking for primary products," he said.
"The opportunities for Australia are now going to be much more in the processed food area and in the fresh foods and ingredients areas.
"It is important that we realise many developing countries are becoming more effective producers of primary products and we need to look at the structure of our own production for the future."

Apple growers look to boost productivity
Australian apple growers are investigating ways to make their orchards more efficient, to compete with the low production costs of other countries.
The industry will set up 60 trial sites around the country to compare different planting styles.
The chairman of Apple and Pear Australia, Darral Ashton, says one option is to double the number of trees per hectare, using dwarf root stock.
"The trees don't take the usual say four or five years to come into production - they come into production very easily," he said.
"Because you have so many trees per hectare, each tree doesn't have to carry so many apples to get that high production per hectare.

Climate change threatens blackcurrant industry
There is a warning today that Tasmania's niche blackcurrant industry is under threat from global warming.
Plant pathologist Steve Wilson says there has been a progressive drop in yields over the past 15 years because of a sharp increase in extremely cold nights.
Mr Wilson is trialing other black currant varieties in an attempt to boost yields, but says he is not hopeful.
"This, I think, may be the canary in the coal mine," he said.
"It is showing that climate change can impact on commercial crops.
"w We've often thought of climate change as something that can impact on natural populations, but here it is having quite a distinct impact, quite a distinct economic one, on a small industry."

Copper find excites stock market investors
A small copper explorer has shot out of obscurity after discovering rich veins of the metal near Cloncurry, in north-west Queensland.
Shares in Australian Mining Investment shot from 29 cents seven weeks ago to a top of $10 yesterday, turning it into a billion-dollar company.
It says drilling at its Rocklands copper deposit is continuing around the clock to feed the stock market more news.
Hartley's mining expert Rob Brierley says little is known so far about the Rocklands deposit.
"Not very much at all - I think that's what captured the imagination of the market," he said.
"In fact it's really been a meteoric rise.
"There is a long way for this company to go, but it's great to see that a discovery can still capture the imagination of the investment public."
Shares in Australian Mining Investment are in a trading halt.

Korean missile tests boost oil price
The price of crude oil has hit a record high in the United States overnight after North Korea launched a series of missiles into the Sea of Japan.
The price of crude oil settled at a $US75.19 a barrel.
The prices of gold and silver were also affected. 

Coles backs inland rail link proposal
Coles Myer has backed plans for an inland rail link between Brisbane and Melbourne but supporters of the project say that is not enough to get it off the ground.
The head of the Australian Transport and Energy Corridor, Everald Compton, says governments will be the key to the $4 billion rail network.
Coles Myer has lodged a submission to a Productivity Commission inquiry into the nation's freight system, saying the inland project would help to make rail more efficient.
But Mr Compton says it is now in the hands of government.
"The Coles Myer thing won't make any difference because other people have said that before," he said.
"For instance, Woolworths said it some years ago and governments took no notice of them."

Snowy inquiry head attacks 'secrecy culture'
The head of a New South Wales Government inquiry into ongoing public ownership of the Snowy Hydro-Electric Scheme says he is trying to break down a culture of secrecy within the authority.
A proposed $3 billion float of the state and federal-owned power and irrigation provider was scuttled in the wake of public protest last month.
At a hearing in the Snowy Mountains town of Cooma yesterday, inquiry chairman Gordon Moyes said he heard evidence of a systematic, long-term lack of transparency by Snowy Hydro.
"There's been an absolute failure in terms of communication, not just recently, it's been a culture that's come to us from evidence for at least 20 years," he said.
"Who told them not to communicate, who actually authorised the change in nature of the company's businesses?
"They are very significant and important questions and will determine the results of the inquiry."
The final report is due on October 27.

Sea rangers meet in Arnhem Land
One hundred sea rangers from more than 14 different language groups across Arnhem Land are meeting this week, at the Aboriginal community of Maningrida, 550 kilometres from Darwin.
Aboriginal land makes up 85 per cent of the Territory coastline and while the conference is an opportunity to share skills and ideas, the main focus is finding a secure funding to continue their work.

