A global share market fall in mineral and energy stocks is having unexpected benefits for wheat prices, with futures markets at or near all-time highs.
Analysts say speculative funds appear to be pouring money into wheat, as they turn away from oil, gold and copper.
Wheat prices on the Chicago Futures Exchange rose again overnight, to around $AUD220 per tonne.
Brett Stevenson, from Market Check, says even better prices are being offered for wheat for March 2008 and 2009, and at around $250 a tonne, they are just below the 1995 record.
"We are faced for the first time a situation where the forward prices three years in the future are at extraordinarily high levels, nearly records," Mr Brett Stevenson said.
"We have got massive amounts of money invested into the metals. We think some of that money maybe coming in to the soft commodity funds in other words, wheat, you know, grains, that sort of thing.

Weaker price for Indian wheat deal
Despite a boom in wheat futures and the lowest global wheat stocks in 25 years, Australian farmers are not getting top grain prices this season.
In the latest deal, Australia is believed to have offered to sell wheat to India at a much lower price than its major competitors.
Grains analyst Malcolm Bartholomaeus says that is largely due to the practise of selling each year's stocks, before the next season's harvest.
"While it may be tempting to hold wheat back against this rising market and achieve higher prices later in the year, the practise in Australia has really been to clear each crop before the next one comes in basically at whatever price," he said.
"The storage and handling companies and growers get pretty cranky if we go into the next harvest with stocks still being held in the system and I guess if AWB think that to get rid of the wheat they need to push it out at lower prices, then that's what they're doing."

Continuing bear market may lead to nervous investors
The Australian Stock Exchange has begun trading marginally weaker, despite stronger commodity prices on the London Metal Exchange overnight.
In 10 days the local market has dropped $80 billion, reacting to weakening metal prices.
Although many analysts say the market needed a correction, Hartleys resource expert Rob Brierley says investors will start to get nervous if this bear market continues.
"Probably another week of this and people would be extremely worried," he said.

Govt, Telstra assurances sought for 3G rollout
The Federal Government is under pressure to regulate the rollout of Telstra's new 3G mobile phone network, to make sure rural Australia is not disadvantaged when the current CDMA service is shutdown.
Telstra has promised it will not turn-off CDMA before January 2008, even if the 3G network has reached equivalent coverage before then.
But in Senate Estimates hearings yesterday National Party Senator Fiona Nash told Telstra representatives, regional areas deserve more than just assurances from the phone company.
"But what if I just take you back to the Extel example and early on in the desk top study and the work that had been done in terms on what could be rolled out technologically, and now it seems that, 'oops that wasn't quite right'? What I'm trying to make sure for those people that live out in regional Australia that we don't get to the end of the rollout and hear from Telstra again, 'oops we didn't get that quite right'."

Road cuts 'add to Wadeye violence'
Poor road infrastructure is said to have contributed to ongoing violence within the Northern Territory's largest Indigenous community.
Flooding cuts off the community of Wadeye for six months of every year and with only sea or air access it is hard for police to reach.
At least four homes have been destroyed during violence in recent days.
About 100 residents have fled and are camping in tents beside the Port Keats Road in the lower Daly region.
Fifty people are stranded at the Daly River Crossing.
Mango farmer Gary Higgins says they are being forced to camp at his front gate.
"Yesterday when we came in there was about 30 or 40 people all at our front gate," he said.
"There is a big rock bar there and they actually use that from there to get across into the community opposite.
"They can only get their vehicles to our front gate.

FMG considers rail access appeal
A bid by the Fortescue Metals Group (FMG) to use a BHP Billiton railway in Western Australia's Pilbara has failed.
While the line is owned by the mining giant, FMG has argued it should be allowed access to take advantage of the resources boom, instead of having to build another railway.
After years of debate, Treasurer Peter Costello was expected to make an announcement on the proposal yesterday but the deadline passed without comment.
FMG's Julian Tapp says the company is looking at how it might appeal the decision, which is a blow for all small iron ore companies in the region.
"We've been doing this not just for ourselves, but for general public interest," he said.

Drought-hit farmers hope for transport subsidies
The grip of the drought is tightening in New South Wales.
The latest figures show nearly two-thirds of the state is drought declared, and much of the rest is marginal.
Only 10 per cent of the state is considered satisfactory.
State Primary Industries Minister Ian Macdonald has spent the morning discussing the deteriorating conditions with his colleagues in Cabinet.

Roma saleyard replaces stock ID equipment
Australia's biggest saleyard is changing its national livestock identification equipment but management denies that is because it is not efficient.
Run-through scanners were introduced at Roma in southern Queensland in July last year, to comply with the new animal traceback laws.
Since there there have been complaints of time delays and ongoing debate over whether the equipment or the agents are to blame.
Rob Loughnan, from the saleyard's board, says delays are an issue.
But he says the main reason for the change is because the system cannot easily separate an individual beat from a herd.
"The market research is telling us that very soon the buyers will be wanting to know if there is an animal in a particular pen that is not lifetime traceable and that's not going to suit their requirements and that's going to have to be highlighted," he said.

Study to consider wine industry's future
Increased domestic and international competition has prompted a new study into the future direction of the wine industry.
The Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation and the Winemakers Federation of Australia are conducting the state of the industry study, which is to be released next year.
But the report will not offer short-term solutions for growers unable to sell their grapes.
The federation's Dominic Nolan says it is to protect the long-term future of the wine industry, and is not a knee-jerk reaction to the grape glut.
"The decisions that we make about planting today really has an impact in five years' time or beyond," he said.
"What we're looking at is very much a strategic document, we're talking what's going to happen in the next 10 to 20 years.

Vet's braham fertility research honoured
The highest accolade in veterinary science has been awarded to a man partly responsible for the success of brahman cattle in northern Australia.
Dr Keith Entwistle has been awarded the Gilruth Prize at the Australian Veterinary Association's annual conference in Hobart this week.
He says years of research with his colleagues helped to solve problems with cow and bull fertility, when the brahman breed was first introduced.
"A lot of the research that we did over the last 30 years has certainly contributed to the wider use of the brahman," he said.

AWB profit rises despite scandal
Despite the oil-for-food inquiry and a sliding share price, wheat handler AWB has delivered a strong half-year result.
AWB admits it is in a difficult operating environment but its profit is up 5 per cent to $86 million before tax.
Profits have been boosted by a strong performance from the national pool, as well as business outside the wheat trade.
The Cole inquiry has cost almost $10 million so far.
The final bill is expected to total $18 million, as long as there are no extensions.
While happy with the returns, chairman Brendan Stewart says the company is determined to restore its reputation.
"I think what this demonstrates is that while we're in challenging times, that AWB is a very resilient business and we've got a good foundation for the future," Mr Stewart said.
Mr Stewart has reaffirmed the company's plans to separate AWB Limited from its international export arm.
"This is a clear direction from the board that we are prepared to make changes that deliver security and certainty to the single desk," he said.
AWB's results also divulge a payout worth more than $1 million to former managing director Andrew Lindberg.
Mr Stewart has refused to confirm any planned changes to management until after the Cole inquiry hands down its findings. 

New documents
The Cole inquiry will be able to scrutinise new documents from AWB, including the wheat exporter's own internal investigation into Iraqi kickback allegations.
The Federal Government has agreed to change the Royal Commissions Act after a request from Commissioner Terence Cole.
The changes will come into effect from June 13 and hearing are expected to be resumed the following week.

Independent probe
Meanwhile, a key US Senator on farm issues is asking for an independent investigation of AWB's kickbacks and the failure of US authorities in that country to do anything about it.
US Senator Tom Harkin is asking the independent inspector-generals of the US Agriculture and State Departments to investigate the AWB and why the Bush Administration has brushed aside similar requests.
Senator Harkin's spokesman Dave Townsend says what happened to the $200 million in alleged AWB kickbacks is a key issue.
"Prior to the fall, those kickbacks were going to Saddam Hussein," he said.
"While Hussein is no longer in power, Senator Harkin would like to know where that money was going ... and why, at the time, ... we weren't about to figure out that those contracts still contained kickbacks."
Mr Townsend says Senator Harkin wants the $220 million recovered and returned to the Iraqi people. 

Wheat sales
The scandal is continuing to affect Australia's wheat trade with Iraq.
Despite Federal Government speculation that a $90 million deal could be salvaged, a member of the consortium negotiating the deal says it has definitely failed.
Graincorp, ABB Grain and Western Australia-based CBH have been attempting to deliver $350,000 tonnes of wheat but contractual problems have stalled the deal.

WA lifts wheat import ban
Wheat varieties from the eastern states will be allowed back into Western Australia, with the lifting of a ban on imports.
The restriction has been in place since December to try to prevent the introduction of wheat streak mosaic virus.

Storm season prediction lifts oil price
The price of a barrel of crude oil has gone up again overnight, after the United States' weather forecaster predicted an above-average storm season in the Gulf of Mexico.
Twenty per cent of the gulf's oil facilities are still off-line from last season.
ANZ Bank commodity analyst Andrew Harrington says it is the 11th above-average cyclone season in a row, and is raising questions about the effects of climate change.
"Another above-average season doesn't say much when the average is creeping upwards," he said.
"I guess it's kind of ironic when fossil fuel is driving the climate change and then you have climate change hammering fossil fuel supplies."

Vets push for foreign abattoir audits
The Australian Veterinary Association wants a grading system for overseas abattoirs, to better manage the welfare of exported livestock.
National president Dr Matt Makin says the treatment of Australian animals once they are unloaded in overseas ports is becoming an increasingly contentious part of the trade.
Cattle exports to Egypt were suspended earlier this year, after mistreatment concerns were raised.
Dr Makin says the Australian industry needs to take a greater role in managing animal welfare, not just in the lead up to and during export.
"We've been in heavy discussions with industry and with the Government to push the concept of facility audits overseas," he said.

Australians to train Malaysian abattoir staff
There is expected to be improved animal welfare standards at new cattle abattoir and training centre being built in Australia's second largest live export market, Sabah in Malaysia.
The facility is expected to process up to 10,000 cattle from the Northern Territory.
Robert McFarlane, from the Department of Primary Industries, says it will be built to Australian standards.
"They will hopefully be able to processing, 70 or 80 or anything up to 100 a day if they want to, in due time," he said.
"The object is to train people and then we step back and allow them to carry on training they're own people.

Abetz urges cooperation in illegal fishing fight
Australia is calling for a stronger global effort to combat illegal fishing.
Signatories to a United Nations agreement on fishing are meeting in New York to debate how to tackle the problem.
The UN says the world fishing fleet is two-and-a-half times above sustainable levels, and super vessels from countries like China and Indonesia are operating outside international law.
Australia's Fisheries Minister, Senator Eric Abetz, says more cooperation is needed to stop rampant illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, which is decimating stocks.
"We see the agreement as very important but we now are getting to ensuring that it is properly implemented," he said.

Farmers welcome new transport subsidies
Farmers across New South Wales have welcomed the reintroduction of transport subsidies under a new drought package announced by the State Government.
An extra $5 million will be spent on the movement of stock, fodder and water, and fund drought support workers until the end of the year.
Ninety per cent of the state is now in drought or considered marginal.
New South Wales farmer Jock Laurie says the package goes a long way towards helping producers to get through the current crisis.
"Certainly it is a lot better than it was this time yesterday morning," he said.
"We have got to acknowledge the fact that the Government has moved reasonably quickly on this.
"One thing we want more than anything else is a big shower of rain.

Remote education changes 'exciting'
Major changes have been announced in the Northern Territory to improve the education of students in remote areas.
Existing schools will be merged into a new distance learning service, with new teaching positions and improved technology.
And under a two year trial, the Katherine School of the Air will also offer classes to up to year nine.
Deidre White of Narwietooma Station, north west of Alice Springs, is hoping the trial will be rolled out across the Territory.
"Parents were really worried about losing our year sevens because our schools go from preschool to year sevens, because it's really to send the kids away to boarding school in year six, or at the end of year six, is really they are just little kids basically (aged 11 or 12 years)," she said.

New gold mine set for official opening
Australia's newest gold mine on the edge of the remote Tanami Desert in Western Australia is being opened today by Governor-General Major General Michael Jeffery.
The Coyote gold mine has taken more than a decade to become operational, at a time when gold prices are enjoying record highs.
The gold mine is situated in the remote desert country between Halls Creek and Alice Springs.
Owned by junior resources company, Tanami Gold, the Coyote mine has taken 12 years from the discovery of its first gold deposits to actual mining.
The project was put on hold last year when management decided the price hike in steel and labour would make it unfeasible, though some number crunching and a revised mine plan turned it into a workable option given the record high gold prices.
The company signed an agreement with traditional owners last year, guaranteeing jobs and business opportunities for the Tjurabalan people.

Qld rainforest fruits producer takes out national award
A Queensland producer who grows native rainforest fruits for gourmet foods has been named Australia's first Rural Woman of the Year.
It is the first time the seven state and territory winners have been in line for a national award and Martha Shepherd, from Eumundi on the Sunshine Coast hinterland, says she couldn't have received a higher accolade.
"It's a tremendous honour to be representing rural women, they're such an amazing group to begin with," she said.
"But also to have the opportunity to represent the award nationally and show how significant it is for the careers and the future of the many rural women.

WEA's days may be numbered, boss says
The head of Australia's wheat export watchdog has conceded his agency could be abolished after the oil-for-food Inquiry.
Wheat Export Authority (WEA) chairman Tim Besley told a marathon senate estimates hearing nothing would be the same after the Cole inquiry and pleaded for the role of any future body to be made clearer.
"My plea to anyone who's changing the act is for goodness sake make it clear just precisely what the role of the Wheat Export Authority or its successor body may have," he said.
Senators at the hearing also attacked WEA chief executive Glen Taylor over his pay package, age and qualifications.
Liberal Jeannie Ferris wanted to know why wheat growers paid Mr Taylor $350,000 last year.
"Mr Taylor earns more than the Prime Minister which is quite a remarkable feat I would have thought," he said.

MacNeil resigns over wheat fight
A public fight over a grower levy for the Wheat Export Authority between the Grains Council and the federal Agriculture Minister has claimed a victim.
New South Wales board member Angus MacNeil has resigned from the council, after it attacked Peter McGauran for backflipping on a decision to reduce the levy.
"All the grains industry needs to be pushing in the same direction," he said.
"Unfortunately the grains council is alienating some of the key stakeholders and having difficulty working with them and I just don't think that's my style and I don't think it is going to give us the best outcome.
"I mean there was a fairly public tiff that the Grains Council had with minister McGauran last week on the ABC.
"That is the style of thing that has happened and it is the sort of style I don't appreciate and I don't think is going to achieve us very much."

Bird flu simulation finds response times wanting
While Australia is well equipped to deal with a bird flu outbreak, response times by government agencies need to be improved.
That is the finding of Exercise Eleusis, a three-day simulation of Australia's response to a fictional outbreak of the deadly H5N1 strain of bird flu, held last year.
Deputy chief veterinary officer, Bob Biddle, says the report card also shows more cooperation is needed between animal and human health agencies, and farmers.
"The report shows that the right decisions were made and with the access to the right sort of information that was available out and about in the exercise scenario but that the committees could have perhaps reached those decisions more rapidly," he said.

Australia's BSE-free status confirmed
Australia's status as a country free from mad cow disease has officially been confirmed by the world's leading animal health agency.

Kraft cream cheese factory moves from Vic to SA
Locals in the northern Victorian town of Strathmerton say they are shocked at a decision by Kraft Foods to move cream cheese production out of the state.
A total of 150 employees will be affected by the restructure over the next two years, with the production being moved to Suttontown, near Mount Gambier, in south-east South Australia.
Former Strathmerton resident and the head of Moira Shire, Gavin Cator, says the news is devastating.
"The impact on the town, it's going to obviously have a huge impact in confidence," he said.
"We believe the dairy industry very has a good future, we have strong dairy industry in the Goulburn Murray valley, and it's disappointing that manufacturing components of it and the value adding we seek locally can't be provided."

Compost access hits mushroom growers
Half of Queensland's mushroom growers say they are facing closure because they can not access locally-produced compost.
The state's largest supplier, Darling Downs Mushrooms, will shut its plant near Toowoomba next month.
It is owned by multinational company Chiquita, and provides more than 20 of Queensland's growers with compost, a vital ingredient for mushroom production.
Withcott producer Bruce White is accusing Chiquita of trying to squeeze small growers out of the market.

Govts told to prepare for loss of industry
Local councils and state governments are being told they should be planning for a potential loss of industry decades before it might occur, if they are to give rural towns a future.
Demographer and social researcher Bernard Salt believes communities need to plan for the worst, and guarantee themselves a range of employment and investment.
He says they should be looking 20 years down the track.

Govt urged to improve appeal of mining towns
With the booming resources sector, WA's Chamber of Minerals and Energy says the State Government needs to do more to make mining towns more attractive places to live.
The chamber says one in five Western Australians are contributing to the $40 million resources sector.
Spokesman Tim Shanahan says mining companies are paying record levels of royalties and it is up to the State Government to ensure workers are benefiting from the boom.
"The State Government is the responsible authority for making making those investments in regional towns," he said.
"We do think there's more to be done in investing in regional communities throughout Western Australia.

Vic Govt considers renewable energy scheme
The Victorian Government is considering a mandatory renewable energy target to encourage wind farm expansion.
The Government says there is no other incentive to grow the renewable energy industry, because the Federal Government will not increase its targets.
Energy Minister Theo Theophanous says power companies will only buy more green energy if they have targets to meet.
"We are still not quite at 10 per cent renewable for the whole country and that's why we are currently looking at the question of whether Victoria should just develop its own renewable energy type scheme, similar to the national MRETS scheme," he said.

Industry welcomes crackdown on illegal fishing
The fishing industry has welcomed new Federal Government legislation cracking down on illegal fishing.
Fisheries Minister Eric Abetz is planning to introduce legislation today that contains a maximum penalty of three years in jail and an $825,000 fine.

Tuna hatchery to be built on Eyre Peninsula
Contruction of the world's first bluefin tuna hatchery has begun on South Australia's Eyre Peninsula.
The new onshore facility at Arno Bay has been developed by the Clean Seas company to breed tuna in captivity.
Kingfish and mulloway are already being bred at the site.

Shake-up for wool industry
The wool industry is set for a major shakeup, with the Australian Wool Exchange (AWEX) to abandon its auction rooms in Sydney and Melbourne and slash the size of its board.
AWEX will end its auction room leases at Yennora in Sydney and Brooklyn in Melbourne by the end of the year, handing the ball to wool brokers, who already run sales rooms in Newcastle and Fremantle.
A review of company services has found the wool industry holds market reporting and wool classer services above the provision of selling centres, although grower bodies and exporters have been surprised by the decision.
Chris Kelly from exporter Itochu says rival auctions by Australian Wool Handlers has put AWEX under pressure.
"Look I'm quite sure that if AWH didn't do what they did, I think this decision wouldn't have been made," he said.
"I think the exporters now would quite rightly question the benefit of AWEX in regard to saleroom issues."

Grim winter rain outlook for eastern Australia
Despite previous forecasts, eastern Australia now looks set to receive below average rainfall this winter.
The latest outlook from the National Climate Centre says most of Victoria, Tasmania, New South Wales and Queensland can expect a drier than average year, while Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory can expect close to average rains.
Climatologist Blair Trewin says regions still struggling with drought are the least likely to see big winter rains.
"The outlook for northern New South Wales and southern Queensland is a rather dry one," he said.
"In most of that region we are saying the chances of above average rainfall are only 35 to 40 per cent so about a 60 to 65 per cent chance of coming in below normal.

AWB to boost payments to growers
In some good news for the wheat industry, AWB Limited has increased the amount of money it will pay growers next year to reflect a big jump in world grain prices.
The National Pool Price is up $15 a tonne, at $220 for the benchmark Australian premium white wheat.
That is $32 higher than the current harvest price.
AWB's National Pools manager David Johnson says the move has been fuelled by a poorer crop outlook in the US, and higher investment in the futures market by hedge fund speculators.
"While futures have been rallying the cash market for wheat has not been reflecting that full rally in prices and this is one of the major reasons why we have a number of people saying the pools aren't going up as much as they could have and that is because the cash wheat market internationally has not gone up as much as the futures markets are reflecting," he said.
"Stocks continue to tighten, that certainly augurs well for prices as we move forward."

Cole inquiry
In related news, the head of the Australian Federal Police will meet with Oil for Food Commissioner Terence Cole next week, as he weighs up whether to investigate evidence from the inquiry.
AFP commissioner Mick Keelty has told a Senate estimates hearing there has been no decision on whether to press charges against AWB employees.
Under questioning he told the hearing evidence from the Cole inquiry is yet to be referred to the federal police.
"Not as yet Senator, I have a meeting with the royal commissioner on the first of June," he said.
"I don't suppose he's indicated what meeting's about?" asked the senator.
"Well I don't think that's an appropriate question to ask the commissioner in any event, even if he knew," Mr Keelty said.
Meanwhile the Federal Opposition has stepped up attacks on AWB for claiming a tax deduction on its $300 million kickback payments to Iraq.
Labor says AWB has legal advice claiming it will not suffer a tax penalty on the deduction, and has called on the Government to step-in.
But Assistant Treasurer Peter Dutton says the matter is in the hands of the Australian Tax Office, and it will decide if AWB should be penalised.

PM defends vote on Snowy Hydro sale
Prime Minister John Howard has rejected legal opinion that a vote on the sale of the Commonwealth's share in Snowy Hydro is unconstitutional.
He says the Government will press on with the sale, despite admitting most Australians are against it.
Opposition to the sale has built considerably since the Government and Labor agreed on a motion seven weeks ago, which cleared the way for the sell-off.
The Greens and some government members say they have legal advice the Parliament should have voted on legislation, and not just passed a parliamentary motion.
"The process of getting parliamentary approval for the sale of commonwealth Snowy Hydro shares is illegal," said Greens leader Bob Brown.
Mr Howard expects to hear more opposition from within his own party to the sale next week, but says his own legal advice is clear.

GG foreshadows future outback tours
After a fortnight sleeping in his swag, the Governor-General has called for all future governors-general to take annual tours of the outback.
Over the past two weeks, Major General Michael Jeffrey has covered thousands of kilometres from the Birdsville track to Western Australia's Tanami Desert, trying to bridge the divide between city and country.
Major General Jeffrey hopes an annual event could showcase the positives of rural life.
"And I'd hope to persuade my successors to do the same things, so it becomes part and parcel of the Governor-General's role to be out there in the bush, be seen to be in the bush and to be seen to be saying well done folks," he said.

Beef giant pays $97m for Top End stations
Australia's biggest beef producer will pay $97 million for two Northern Territory cattle stations.
The Australian Agricultural Company has entered into a heads of agreement sale with Heytesbury to buy "Anothony Lagoon" and "Eva Downs".

Vets call for regulation of animal welfare debate
The Australian Veterinary Association says governments must regulate how the animal welfare debate is presented to children.
It is critical of a campaign being run by animal rights group Voiceless, which encourages school children to speak out against issues like live exports and factory farming, saying its biased and threatens farming livelihoods.
President, Dr Matt Makin says children should be exposed to the debate, but is questioning what he says are extremist views from both sides.
"You know this is also a responsibility for governments who are in charge of school curriculums," he said.
"They need to, you know, be ensuring that children are exposed to all the facts on both sides of the debate so that the younger generation can form their own opinion.
"And presenting them with one side of the debate, I think, if this Government doesn't do anything about that I think it's quite irresponsible."

DNA used to identify stolen sheep
Police have used DNA testing to identify sheep at the centre of stock theft investigations in Victoria.
The Mildura Magistrates Court has found a farmer from Murrayville, in the state's north-west, guilty of theft, after DNA testing proved the genetic line of 40 cross-bred lambs.
Senior constable Andrew Harris says while the value of the sheep was at the lower end of the scale, the case demonstrates the value of the technology in investigations.

Riverland grape growers seek compo
The Riverland Wine Grape Growers Association wants a partial compensation package from the Federal Government.
It says the assistance drop uncontracted grapes on the ground, avoiding the need for them to sell fruit to wineries at low prices and contribute to the national oversupply.
Executive officer Chris Byrne says the money could come from the Wine Equalisation Tax.
"That would go a long way towards compensating growers not to sell their fruit at 100 or 200 dollars a tonne," he said.

Violence disrupts aid to E Timorese farmers
Australian aid efforts to help farmers in East Timor are being disrupted by violence which has erupted in the capital, Dili.
The Seeds of Life project introduces and tests new varieties of major food crops for subsistence farmers.
Team leader Rob Williams says roadblocks around Dili are making it hard to get out to surrounding districts.
"The work in the district continues on, we need to build planting material up, ready for next wet season," he said.
"Cassava, sweet potato, corn-seed and those plants are still growing on.
"We have staff in the districts who are continuing on with the work. The civil disturbance hasn't affected them, anywhere near as much as it has in Dili. There's drivers delivering sweet potato cuttings, we have staff irrigating maize crops, so that we have enough seed and planting material for next year.

Green award for horticulture industry
Efforts by the horticulture industry to stop using one of the worst chemicals to affect the ozone layer have been internationally recognised.
The tomato and strawberry industries have phased out the use of methyl bromide.
Australia agriculture has just been given an ozone protection award from the Environment Protection Authority in the US, which Jeff Mcspedden from Ausveg says recognises our clean and green industry.
"There's been some research done on alternatives and that was to use softer chemicals and the other one was to use steam generators to steam the soil, or to use solarisation where they plough it in the hotter climates and let the sun get rid of nematodes and problems in the soil," he said.

Merger could have dire consequences for Nationals: analyst
An expert on rural politics says the in-principle merger agreement between the Queensland Liberal and National parties is a disaster for the federal Nationals.
The agreement stems from months of talks between the Queensland conservatives parties on how best to beat Labor Premier Peter Beattie.
But political analyst Professor Brian Costar from Swinburne University says a merger even at a state level would have dire consequences for the Nationals in Queensland and federally.
He says a merger could cut the Nationals representation in the federal ministry and reduce the vote of both parities, leading to the rebirth of a 'One Nation style' party.
"Some of the issues that gave rise to One Nation, and particularly in Queensland where it was strongest, are still bubbling along below the surface," he said.
Federal party leader Mark Vaile has distanced the Nationals from a federal merger saying there has never been a better time for regional areas to have a specific rural conservative party.
In Queensland, the merger proposal has received a mixed response.
Just 18 months ago it was rejected out of hand, but today it is seen as the only way to ultimately topple Labor.
Lecturer in politics at Brisbane's Griffith University Paul Williams says farmers could be the ultimate losers.
"I think that they potentially have a lot to lose," he said.
"One can suspect that over time that the Nationals' voice will be drowned out.

Farmers' confidence at low levels
Nearly one third of farmers are expecting conditions to worsen in the coming year.
With a third successive survey in which confidence has declined, Rabobank head of rural banking, Neil Dobbin, says it is almost at the lowest level since surveys began.
Many farmers in New South Wales and Queensland are anxiously waiting for rain in order to start their winter cropping and livestock producers are also affected by the lack of feed and on-farm water supplies.
Mr Dobbin says the drought is causing great stress.
"We are really concerned for our clients and for the rural industry as a whole, there is nothing worse than being in this period of time when you are sitting on the fence if you like, waiting for rain," he said.
"We are in no man's land and we just pray that we really get some good rains and we need substantial rains.
"We just need that break, get the crops in, there is a lot of hand feeding going on at the moment.

More extreme weather predicted for Victoria
Victoria's Department of Primary Industries is predicting the state will experience more extreme weather, with increasing temperatures and less rainfall.
It is carrying out a research project called the Climate Change Challenge to try to help farmers adapt.
Project leader David Halliwell says most farmers in drier areas like the Wimmera and Mallee are used to a variable climate, but they might not be ready to cope with what climate models are predicting.
"Our frequency of extreme weather events are likely to increase into the future," he said.
"It is also saying that on average temperatures will increase but this doesn't just mean the maximum temperatures will increase, but the minimum temperatures will increase a little bit as well.

AQIS officers on alert in NT
Quarantine authorities in the Northern Territory are on full alert, as evacuees from East Timor continue to arrive.
More than 700 of the estimated 25,000 people displaced from Dili have flown into Darwin.
C-130 Hercules cargo planes are carrying up to 180 evacuees at a time from Dili to Darwin on unscheduled flights.
So far, the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service has checked over 720 evacuees from East Timor and 209 crew from the Defence Force.
Whilst many of the passengers are traumatised and are carrying the bare minimum in the haste to escape the unrest, all bags are being X-rayed or searched for exotic plants like siam and khaki weed, and diseases such as grapevine leaf rust.
The giant African snail is also a major risk, and clothing, and footwear is being searched for its eggs, which can be carried in soil material.

Wine export prices drop
The latest wine industry survey has found wine export prices are down by a third since 2002 and 40 per cent of Australian wineries are running at a loss.
The Deloitte Wine Industry Benchmarking Survey indicates many wineries are struggling to survive, particularly in export markets.
Deliotte partner Stephen Harvey says the big supermarket chains in Europe have taken advantage of the Australian wine glut and are forcing prices down, and the whole industry is feeling the pain.
"We are seeing a lot of it go over for buyers' own brands in the big supermarket chains, your Sainburys, Tescos, Aldis etc," he said.
"That of course does have a flow-on effect to the branded wines. If people are able to buy buyers' own brands at very cheap prices, it naturally adds some pricing pressure to your more popular and well-known brands."
Meanwhile, grape growers in South Australia's Riverland have welcomed the proposal for a partial compensation package.
About 600 people attended a rally yesterday, hearing proposals from the local grower association, which will be put to Friday's wine industry summit in Melbourne.
The package recommends growers with uncontracted grapes be paid $5,000 per hectare to not harvest them in the hope of reducing the national oversupply.
The $80 million cost would be shared by governments and industry.
Loxton grower Glen Arnold says he hopes the proposal is considered.
"It's a way forward for growers to have some hope," he said.

Canola price on the way up
The price outlook for canola has improved over the last few weeks, with Canadian carry over stocks and projected plantings being reduced.
As well, Canada has reported improved crush tonnages and canola exports.
Katie Cole, from Cooperative Bulk Handling in Albany in Western Australia, says there is also good news on canola pricing from Europe's bio-fuel industry.
"Europe is also the last major reason why we're seeing some really good news in the canola market and that's the bio-diesel industry," she said.
"Europe's expected to double it's consumption of vegie oils for bio-diesel this year which will mean going up from 3 million tonnes to 6 million tonnes.

Station sale to allow for expansion
The head of Heytesbury says the sale of two of its cattle stations will allow for more strategic investment into its existing live export cattle and wine businesses.
Heytesbury announced the $97 million sale of Anthony Lagoon and Eva Downs Stations in the Northern Territory to Australia's biggest beef producer, Australian Agricultural Company, on Friday.
Chairman Janet Holmes a Court says while there are no immediate plans to purchase other stations, the company might look to consolidate some of its operations.
"It gives us the opportunity also to maybe expand our wine operations or buy other properties that are closer to the VRDs and the Kimberley properties that we already have," she said.

Raspberry levy to go into marketing
Raspberry growers across Australia will have to pay a new industry levy from July 1 to cover costs of more research and development.
The $13 million industry is set to be boosted by the 10 cents a kilo levy, which will be collected by wholesale agents and supermarkets, and imposed on exported berries.

Tomato growers aim for sweet success
Growing sweeter tomatoes has been identified as the major goal for Australian growers over the next five years.
Processing tomato growers, whose crops are made into paste and sauce, are currently drawing up their Industry strategic plan.
Over the last 30 years, the amount of tomatoes produced per hectare has risen from 25 to 84 tonnes.
But the chair of the Australian Processing Tomato Research Council, Ian Bryce, says their taste suffered.
"The sweetness of tomatoes has gone down," he said.

NFF concerned about Snowy Hydro privatisation
Opposition to the privatisation of Snowy Hydro continues to build.
The nation's chief rural lobby group has, for the first time, expressed serious concerns about the sale and its effect on the National Water Initiative.
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) fears little regard will be given to farmers who rely on Snowy Hydro's water if the scheme is sold-off.
And NFF president Peter Corish says funds from any privatisation should be used to protect the environment, irrigators and affected river communities.
He has also called for tighter regulation of Snowy investors, including a permanent 10 per cent cap on ownership of Snowy shares.
"We want to ensure private ownership of the water behind a dam wall, which is something that is certainly new, it's a new principle for us in Australia that doesn't negatively impact on the people who benefit from that water currently," he said.
The three federal independents will table a motion in Parliament today, calling for the sale to be blocked entirely.
And Nationals MP Kay Hull plans to introduce a private member's bill into Federal Parliament to permanently cap individual shareholdings in Snowy Hydro to 10 per cent.
The legislation would also stipulate that the majority of directors be Australian and that the head office remains in this country.
Mrs Hull opposes the sale, but says, as a last resort, this bill would limit foreign ownership.
"I will continue to fight the sale, this is a safety net in the event the sale can not be ceased," she said.
"I want to ensure that enshrined in legislation is all of the safeguards that need to take place to ensure that big companies and overseas companies can't come in and buy up the Snowy."
It is unclear whether the private member's bill will receive the support of the Government or the Opposition.

Snowy River clearance work 'too little, too late'
A group of farmers in Victoria's Gippsland region says blockages at the mouth of the Snowy River are being overlooked.
Reduced flows and drought have caused a sandbar to form across the mouth of the Snowy at Marlo, flooding local pastures and crops.
Clearance work began yesterday but residents say it is too little, too late.
Parks Victoria ranger Dennis Matthews says opening the mouth of the Snowy is difficult and he sympathises with farmers whose properties have been flooded.
"It's not easy being a farmer enduring drought and so on, and then having something like this happen," he said.
"I can understand fully their plight A lot of people farm in low lying areas so I can understand that they would like to see conditions of opening changed.
Queensland Nationals leader Lawrence Springborg is pushing ahead with his plans to merge his party with the Liberals despite significant opposition from both federal Coalition party leaders.
The Prime Minister says he will only support the Nationals becoming Liberals, while federal Nationals leader Mark Vaile is worried his party will be destabilised by the discussions.
This morning in Canberra, National and Liberal politicians were locked in a joint party room meeting discussing the proposal but Mr Springborg says he does not need their approval.
"Queensland could still go it alone and there's a whole range of ways that you can do this to accommodate the concerns that have been raised because those matters have not had the chance to be able to be put," he said.

Beef industry helps out in quake recovery effort
The Australian beef industry is helping with the recovery in quake-hit Yogyakarta in Java.
Feedlotters, including the Consolidated Pastoral Company's Indonesian Joint Venture, are among those helping fund aid for 100,000 homeless people.
Nurendro Trikesowo of the Indonesian Cattle and Buffalo Farmers Association says he is installing 20 health clinics and 20 simple water filters this week.
"That is just a pocket filter system, using some ceramic filters, to make the purification of the water, filtering the water from [toxic bacteria such as] E. coli," he said.
"That is an important thing, that the water will be hygienic to drink for the people. [But] we are just a small part because they need a lot of funds for the recovery and reconstruction.

Goat meat processor seeks more overseas workers
The meat processing industry is negotiating with the Immigration Department about the use of overseas workers.
The nation's largest goat meat processor, Neil Duncan of Charleville in Queensland, says he needs more overseas workers if he is to stay in operation.
But Mr Duncan says the department has stopped processing applications for skilled workers under the 457 visa program.
"The Immigration Department needs to recognise that the meat industry does need skilled workers," he said.
"We can source skilled workers from overseas. They are there waiting and unless they actually start processing our applications, the meat industry in Australia is going backwards.
"We've got to the stage now where we're turning away livestock. We can't process livestock because we just don't have the people to be able to do it."

Grain boosts ABB profits
South Australian agriculture company ABB grain has announced a 24 per cent rise in after tax, half-year profit.
The result for the two-year old corporation is largely attributed to a 35 per cent increase in grain receivals for the last season.
Grain market analyst, Malcolm Bartholemaeus, says that despite the malting section of the company struggling, it is still a strong result.

Wheat consortium expected to announce Iraq deal
An Australian consortium negotiating a 350,000 tonne wheat contract with Iraq is expected to announce this afternoon it has sealed a deal worth close to $100 million.
Last Monday, Wheat Australia said it had failed to come to suitable terms with Iraq and negotiations for the $90 million dollar deal were over.

Strawberry prices tipped to fall
Strawberry prices could fall dramatically later this year.
Queensland's strawberry season is under way, with growers enjoying the best prices they have seen in over a decade - up to $8 a punnet in some supermarkets.
But Bill Sharpe, from the Queensland Strawberry Growers Association, says there will be an oversupply and rock-bottom prices by September.
"Somewhere along the line the middle man get certainly the benefit of it with this oversupply, but the blame is sort of twofold anyway," he said.

WA bans biodiesel plants
Western Australia's Agriculture Protection Board has placed a state-wide ban on two plants being heavily promoted on the Internet as sources of biodiesel.
Bellyache bush and physic nut are both invasive plants, highly toxic to humans and livestock.
Both plants are already on the WA declared plants list, but their status has been upgraded to make sure they are banned state-wide.

Hundreds of stock horses to gather for Polocrosse World Cup
Up to 200 Australian stock horses will be drafted for next year's Polocrosse World Cup in Queensland.
The event will see eight international teams play over a 10-day period in April, at Warwick on the Darling Downs.
World Cup chief horse coordinator, Kent Wells, said it is the nation's biggest recruitment of horses in peacetime.
"Every state will have some," he said.

Young Aussies urged to see outback
From the tracks of Birdsville to the Tanami Desert, the administrator of the Northern Territory has called for an outback visit to become a rite of passage for young Australians, similar to the Gallipoli pilgrimages on Anzac Day.
Ted Egan has proposed a heritage tour, which would particularly encourage city kids to head to the bush.
He says it would help show important elements of this country's history,

Extension granted for forestry tax change submissions
An extension of time has been granted for submissions on the changes to plantation forestry taxes.
Some of the changes include putting a cap on expenditure on plantations in the first year and tax write-offs being conditional on best practice being used.
The closing date for submissions has been extended for another month, until mid-July.
Assistant Treasurer Peter Dutton says it is in response to requests for more time from a number of affected farmers and foresters.
But he denies there has been a backlash to the proposed changes.
"Right around the country in rural areas some farmers are strongly in favour of the way in which these forestry plantations are operated," he said.
"Other farmers outside of the industry have concerns that there is the potential for high prices, inflated prices to be paid for land.

Mixed predictions for pulp mill
Shareholders of Tasmanian forestry giant, Gunns Limited, have been advised that the company's plans to build a pulp mill are risky and they should sell their shares.
The Commonwealth Bank's shares and stockbroking arm, CommSec, predicts Gunns' planned $1.4 billion pulp mill will never be cost-effective.
But industry analyst, Robert Eastment, says he has checked the facts in the report, and does not believe the negativity is warranted.
"It's just another report. There are some good ones, there are some bad ones," he said.

Grain consortium hopeful of more deals with Iraq
Australian grain consortium Wheat Australia says it does not envisage any shipping problems when it begins the export of 350,000 tonnes of wheat to Iraq in the next month.
Twelve weeks of negotiations concluded yesterday when Wheat Australia announced the $100 million wheat contract with Iraq had been finalised.
Spokesman Rhys Ainsworth says with one agreement reached, Wheat Australia is keen to explore further market opportunities.
"I think the good thing about the position that Wheat Australia has got to now is that we have agreed on commercially workable terms that we believe can provide Wheat Australia with a solid platform that will enable it to continue what has been a very long association with one of Australia's most critical international markets," he said.
Plum Grove commodity trader Tony Smith says the deal is good news for Australian growers but prices are still below what farmers in the United States would receive.
He estimates the deal to be worth around $190 a tonne, about $30 below expectations, but does not believe AWB could have done much better.
"At the end of the day, this deal would not have gone ahead if the AWB wasn't happy with the price," he said.
"So there's no way the AWB could've got more. You know, Wheat Australia did everything they could. There's definitely people who are going to come out and make those comments and they're just political comments, scaremongering.

Planned merger not achievable, Vaile says
Federal Nationals leader Mark Vaile says a proposal to merge the Queensland National and Liberal Parties now won't go ahead.
He met with Queensland Nationals leader Lawrence Springborg yesterday and while he denies he has convinced Mr Springborg to abort the plan, Mr Vaile thinks the merger is not achievable.
He says effort now needs to go into developing the Queensland Coalition.
"Clearly if you look at the public comment and concern that's been raised we are fast reaching a point where that is not going to be achievable," he said.
"So my view we need to ensure that Queensland moves ahead developing and refining the existing Coalition arrangements in Queensland."
Deputy federal leader of the Nationals Warren Truss says there is strong support for a united conservative force in Queensland but the merger model was unfair and unworkable for members of the National party .

Snowy Hydro foreign ownership cap not enough: rice growers
The Ricegrowers Association of Australia says the cap on foreign ownership of Snowy Hydro is not enough to protect irrigators' interests.
The New South Wales, Victorian and Federal Governments yesterday agreed to permanently limit foreign ownership of the scheme to 35 per cent, with a cap of 15 per cent for individual foreign investors.
But Ricegrowers Association president Laurie Arthur says that would not prevent a large Australian company buying a majority stake.
"It's some recognition that the governments are listening to the concern that have been put to them," he said.
"It doesn't go far enough, we still believe there's the capacity for an Australian company to have undue influence as regards to the licence that control the water and the release of water."
The Murray Darling Basin Commission and the National Farmers Federation are also worried about aspects of the deal.
But federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says regardless of who owns Snowy Hydro, the interests of irrigators are guaranteed in the Snowy water licensing agreement.
"It was developed by the Australian, New South Wales and Victorian Governments at the time of corporatisation specifically to protect security, it guarantees the volumes for irrigators," he said.

McGuigan Simeon writes down wine stocks
Wine company McGuigan Simeon will write down wine stocks by up to $20 million and will not pay a final dividend to its shareholders this year.
On Monday the company asked the Australian Stock Exchange to halt its trading until this morning, when the results of an operational review were released.
Managing director Dane Hudson says the company was forced to write down stocks because of the recent decline in bulk wine prices.
"It's a small percentage of our total stock," he said.
"This is probably a 9 per cent reduction and it's for older vintages. We are comfortable with our 2006 vintage but this is older stock that we need to reprice to clear on the bulk market."

Survey points to excellent outlook for dairy farmers
There is an excellent outlook for Australia's dairy industry.
Dairy Australia has released its latest report based on the annual dairy farmer survey and interviews with industry members.
The report finds nearly two thirds of dairy farmers are looking to increase the scale of their operations but many smaller operators are selling out or changing to beef or crops.
Increased demand means strong price competition for suppliers between processors.
But one of the report's authors, Steve Spencer, says processors are concerned that tight supply will mean a loss of markets.

Naracoorte meatworkers angry over wages
Local workers at a South Australian abattoir are angry that their hours have been cut, while Chinese employees on temporary visas are being paid full-time wages.
Two hundred and sixty Australian workers at the Teys Brothers meatworks at Naracoorte have been working a four-day week because of a shortage of stock.
But even though the Chinese workers are working a similar number of hours, their visa conditions require that they receive a full week's pay.
Graham Smith, from the Australian Meat Industry Employees Union, says it is absurd.
"The meat industry is seasonal to start with," he said.
"Where the terms of the visa are that you've got to have a severe skills shortage that you've got to fill, it seems absurd that in an industry where we stand people down for large parts of the year because there's no work for them, that you can say there's a corresponding skills shortage."

Farmers give Vic Budget thumbs down
The Victorian Farmers Federation says the Victorian Budget has failed to target pressing road, rail and water infrastructure needs in rural areas.
In fact, the farming body says the State Budget is so disappointing that it may campaign against the Bracks Government during the November election.
VFF president Simon Ramsay says while funding for education is welcome, the Budget is one of missed opportunities.
"The roads is the main one," he said.

Lettuce aphids found in SA
The currant lettuce aphid has been found in South Australia for the first time.
Authorities have detected the pest on properties in the Adelaide Hills and the northern Adelaide Plains.
The aphid was found in Victoria last year and has plagued lettuce crops in Tasmania since 2004.
Originally, South Australia banned imports of interstate lettuce to protect the industry, but this has now been removed.

Tas apple industry facing challenges
The future of apple growing in the Apple Isle is being re-examined, in the light of increased global competition, a high dollar and increasing production costs.
Fruit Growers Tasmania has held a growers meeting to discuss the challenges.
One of the more well-known orcharding families, the Drieesen brothers at Castle Forbes Bay, is opting out of the industry after 50 years.
Jos Driessen says the land, overlooking the scenic D'Entrecasteaux Channel, will be sold to sea changers.
"My plans for the future are to retire. I've been losing the passion to grow apples. I think it's becoming a more difficult industry to be in," he said.

Flinders Is may go native under tourism plan
One of South Australia's biggest islands could become an ecotourism venture.
Peter and Pam Woolford have begun discussions with the Department of Environment and Heritage about de-stocking Flinders Island, which is off Elliston on the state's west coast.
Mr Woolford says he wants to control the feral animals and reintroduce native plants and animals.
"What I'd like to see is the native flora and fauna returned more to its natural state," he said.
"We have some feral animals there, which are probably an inheritance off the Kupara, which ran aground on the island in 1946.

Labour shortage hits northern NSW
More than 50 agricultural jobs are currently going begging on the New South Wales north coast despite unemployment there being almost double the national average.
The beef, chicken and pork industries are facing a critical shortage of labour.
Northern Co-operative Meat Company's Gary Burridge says local businesses are finding workers are turning away from the rural sector.
"We in our organisation are suffering a severe shortage of highly skilled labour and semi-skilled labour," he said.

Govt blueprint for the bush revealed
The Beattie Government has unveiled a long-awaited $150 million blueprint for rural and regional Queensland.
The blueprint is a three-way partnership between state and local governments and the lobby group Agforce.
It came out of anger over tree-clearing laws and a feeling of neglect by the regions west of the Great Dividing Range.
It aims to improve the sustainability, liveability and profitability of regional Queensland.
It covers a new agreement allowing for up to 50 year leases and a commitment to reviewing how tree clearing laws are implemented.
It is also going to pay farmers to be stewards of the environment.

Govt expected to abandon diesel fuel rebate changes
The Federal Government is expected to announce a backflip on proposed changes to its diesel fuel rebate later today.
Under the current system, fuel energy credits are refunded to farmers and other big diesel users through cash payments to bank accounts.
The Government had planned to add the refund to GST rebates, which industry said would create a cash-flow nightmare.

Labor targets regional Coalition voters
The Federal Opposition has moved to capitalise on the turmoil within the Nationals, launching a drive to win over disaffected Coalition voters in regional Australia.
Labor leader Kim Beazley met with the National Farmers Federation (NFF) last night.
He says he wants to open a new dialogue directly with regional Australia.
Mr Beazley says Labor and farmers have plenty in common, despite Labor's opposition to the Workchoices policy and importing foreign workers, which are both supported by the NFF.
Mr Beazley says the party will win seats in regional Australia at the next election based on what he says is a cumulative affect of issues like the sell-off of Telstra, Australia's trade performance and the now defunct Nationals merger.
"After a while everyone wakes up and this is what's happening now," he said.
Mr Beazley says regional development spokesman Simon Crean and disendorsed Opposition agriculture spokesman Gavan O'Connor will lead the regional policy push.

Beef exporters brace for US competition
The United States is hoping to cut Australia's $500 million beef market to South Korea when exports resume next week.
Meat and Livestock Australia's regional manager in Korea Glenn Feist says exporters are bracing themselves for major competition for the first time in more than two years.
He expects to see export levels drop but hopes Australia will be able to hold onto a market share of around 50 per cent.
"Australia won brand of the year twice in a row here with the country of origin labelling with our statement: 'Australian beef clean and safe'," he said.
"But since the US has been out it has given us an opportunity and we grow beef for the five star dining hotels and that sort of stuff - we have got manufacturing beef for the McDonald's and the Burger King [chains] and those guys.
"So I think we will hold our own pretty well up here."
The Cattle Council says Australian producers are likely to retain their stronghold on the market for bone-in beef in Korea.
The amount of US beef allowed in will be limited by a continuing ban on cattle over 30 months of age, which will help Australia remain competitive, according to council president Bill Bray.
"The main trade in beef into Korea has been the bone-in short rib and we've been asked to continue to supply that because we have the highest freedom-ranking for BSE in the world," he said.

Irrigation charge increase expected to hurt farmers
Many New South Wales irrigators look set to pay more for the delivery of their water.
The Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal has released a draft report proposing significant increases to bulk water charges.
The impact will vary across the State but Murray Irrigation is expecting charges to rise by 80 per cent over four years.
General manager George Warne says that is going to hurt farmers.
"Governments don't realise that we've been beaten up by four or five years of drought," he said.

Wool broker plays down buyer protest
Tasmanian wool broker, Roberts Limited, is playing down a protest by buyers at an auction in Melbourne this week.
Sources claim a large number of buyers did not bid on the Roberts catalogue because they believe the company's new wool pool, to supply fibre direct to customers, will cost them their commission.
Of 2,500 bales offered by Roberts, 38 per cent were passed in.
Murray Best from Roberts has confirmed the protest but says it only involved four buyers.
He says the company only wants to sell 10 per cent of Tasmanian wool through the pool system but admits that figure could increase.

Simplot increases prices for pea growers
Vegetable processor Simplot says it is responding to the concerns raised through the Fair Dinkum Food Campaign by offering Tasmanian farmers better prices and contracts for their peas.
Simplot wants to almost double the amount of peas it buys to meet new demand from the major supermarket chains for Australian-grown product.
Managing director Terry O'Brien is also hoping a 6 per cent price rise will encourage growers back into the industry.
"I'm encouraging them to think about the fact that they stimulated a lot of interest last year with their tractor trip to Canberra," he said.

Cattle feedlot given green light
The New South Wales Government has approved a $60 million cattle feedlot at Moira Station near Mathoura in the southern Riverina.
The 160,000 head feedlot will be one of Australia's biggest and include a feed mill and hay processor.
The State Government has ordered the developers to start the feedlot operating at half capacity, with an independent audit required before production can be increased.

Export markets go feral over turn-off label for goat meat
The goat industry is being urged to ditch the term "feral" and relabel its meat to Australian "rangeland" goat.
While there has been a big jump in the number of farmed meat goats in Australia, at least half of the country's exports still come from the feral goat population in semi-arid rangeland country.
John Hayes, from the Wodonga abattoir, which exports to the US, says the term feral is a big turn-off for overseas buyers.

NQ school to set up vet training centre
A north Queensland boarding school is tackling a shortage of rural vets head on.
The Columbia Catholic College plans to build a veterinary training centre on its campus in Charters Towers.
College principal Althea Norton hopes investing more than $300,000 in a new centre will encourage more students to take up vet science.

Teens urged to consider joining cattle industry
More teenagers are being encouraged to consider joining the cattle industry as part of a partnership between a public high school and a cattle station.
The Northern Territory's Coodardie Brahman Stud supplies weaner steers to Taminmin High School on Darwin's outskirts.
The bush steers are broken to halter and presented for show and sale by the students.
Stud director Moira O'brien says it helps to give them a better understanding about the production and marketing cycle of the cattle industry.
"We really enjoy helping them out and working in their program, and I think it's really important for that industry community, collaboration, and anywhere where we can encourage young people and teach city people about agricultural life and cattle station workings and the industry, I think is really, really important," she said.

Irrigators pass no confidence vote in NSW Govt
A vote of no confidence has been passed in the New South Wales Government over its handling of the sale of Snowy Hydro.
The move by Riverina irrigators comes as Finance Minister John Della Bosca meets with concerned farmers today at Deniliquin in the state's south.
Last night in Deniliquin, 300 people showed their displeasure at the New South Wales Government's handling of the sale of Snowy Hydro.
Mr Della Bosca was invited to the public meeting, organised by the Nationals but declined.
Today, in the same town, he will talk with irrigators in a closed meeting to hear their concerns about the sale of Snowy Hydro.
Organised by the Southern Riverina Irrigators Group, farmers say they are worried about what will happen to water entitlements if the Snowy scheme is privatised.

Irrigators relieved at Snowy Hydro sale collapse
Irrigators say they are surprised and relieved at the collapse of the sale of the Snowy Hydro electricity scheme.
The Federal Government pulled out of the sale this morning, citing concern from backbenchers and growing public opposition.
The New South Wales and Victorian Governments have also backed down.
Laurie Arthur from the Rice Growers Association says he did not think there was any way to stop the sale.
He says irrigators were worried about their access to water once the scheme was privatised and most will be pleased with the about-turn.
"I'm sure probably 80 per cent of irrigators are delighted that Snowy Hydro will not be privatised," he said.
"I think some of our people think that governments don't do a particularly good job of running companies and so it's still a very complicated issue and I would predict that we haven't actually seen the last of it within the next 10 years would be surprised if it doesn't raise its head again."
Prime Minister John Howard says although irrigator licensing conditions were a factor in the Government's decision, it was public opinion that forced the change.

Govt urged to protect local ethanol industry
The ethanol industry says it will be devastated by a Federal Government proposal to allow cheap imports into Australia.
Legislation table in Parliament calls for the excise on imported ethanol to be reduced by 2011 to the same rate as locally-produced biofuel.
It also outlines a planned increase in taxes for Australian-made ethanol from 2.5 cents a litre to 12.5 cents.
Bob Gordon from Renewable Fuels Australia says the Government should do more to protect the local industry.
"Unlike other countries we are going to be one of the first countries in the world to actually tax renewable fuels," he said.
"Now we're prepared to live with that but we want a regime for transition that stimulates new industry growth rather than undermining it.
"The one proposed in the tax Bill will clearly undermine that goal."
Resources Minister Ian Macfarlane has denied the claims.
He says ethanol will still have an excise advantage over petrol and the industry has had years to prepare for the changes.
Meanwhile the Federal Government has decided to phase in its changes to the diesel fuel rebate, to give farmers and transport operators time to adjust.
The plan will replace cash payments to farmers with a refund added to GST rebates and was due to be implemented on July 1.
But now, during a two-year transition period, farmers will be able to claim their rebate, but will also have to report it in business activity statements.
South Australian farmer Doug Hall says that will make the system more complicated.
"I just don't see it being any easier at all, it just doesn't make sense to me so why are they playing around with this you know, who is the winner at the end of the day?" he said.
"I'm certainly not sure it's the farmer, it's the damn Government again."
The renewable energy industry wants a national incentive-based market to encourage consumers to use cleaner fuel.
It has released a report looking at development to 2050, in which renewable energy will be cheaper, have high export potential and provides a clean and cheap solution to climate change and energy shortages.
David Holland from Renewable Energy Generators Australia says the Federal Government should extend tax breaks to get the technology up and running.
"The technologies will always be more expensive than the old process of pulling coal out of the ground and setting fire to it," he said.
"The environment is a critical issue not just for Australia but for the planet and really the governments are the only people that are in the position to take that leadership but there needs to be some systemic processes that drive the move towards renewables."
The Government has rejected the call, saying hundreds of millions of dollars have already been allocated to renewable energy generation.

Code of practice limits use of sow stalls
The pork industry has agreed to limit the use of sow stalls under a new code of practice for the welfare of pigs.
Australian Pork Limited, the peak body representing producers, says it will reduce the amount of time pigs spend in the stalls, from the full 16 weeks of pregnancy to six weeks.
Peter Robertson from the New South Wales Farmers Association says it is a proactive step to improve animal care.
"The industry has taken the decision that we have to concede that we need to have sows with a little more exercise during gestation," he said.
"By the same token we need the sow stalls for the first six weeks that they are pregnant so that they do not abort and have other problems at that stage."

Hunter Valley coal miners remain on strike
One hundred Hunter Valley coal miners are into the second day of a week-long strike after a breakdown in talks over wages and conditions.
Workers at the Xstrata-owned United Colliery are the first to undertake a court-approved stoppage under the new federal industrial relations reforms.
They have been attempting to settle on a new enterprise agreement since December.
Xstrata says it has made a good offer and believes the strike is part of a broad political campaign by the unions.
But Grahame Kelly from the CFMEU says the offer does not reflect the performance of the work force.

Boral Timber mills to close
Boral Timber is closing two mills on the north coast of New South Wales as part of a major restructure.
The Kempsey and Bostobrick Mill near Dorrigo will close, with the loss of 47 jobs.

Grain growers told to stop sowing crops
Western Australian grain growers are being told to stop sowing crops because there is no rain in sight for at least two weeks.
Many farmers have already planted a good percentage of their crops and state authorities say they need to assess their financial position.
