After months of asking for support, drought-hit pastoralists on the Nullarbor have been told they will receive help in an attempt to receive federal drought relief.
Western Australia's Agriculture Minister Kim Chance made a flying visit on Saturday and told the group he will lobby the Federal Government to extend exceptional circumstances (EC) funding to the area .
Peter Brown from Arubiddy Station, who hosted the visit, says many pastoralists have been forced to sell off their sheep and cattle because of the lack of rain.

Rain lifts Tasmania's spirits
There has been very welcome rain in Tasmania to lift spirits with falls of between 10 and 30 millimetres.
The state's river levels are at their lowest since record-keeping began 40 years ago.
The very dry southern midlands district of Tunbridge received about 30 millimetres, which Greg Powell says was more than some neighbouring areas.
"We'll we're probably praying a bit harder ... but no, no it's been great for the country," he said.
"I'm a contractor you know and a lot of farmers were putting stock on cereal crops which we wouldn't end up harvesting in the finish, so it's sort of a snowball effect.

Biosecurity plan aims to protect mango industry
A national biosecurity plan has been developed to protect the mango industry.
It will help orchards to prepare for pest and disease outbreaks.
Plant Health Australia's Lindy Hyam says the plan will also help preserve export markets.

Bee industry insiders blamed for expensive 'sting'
Bee thieves in Tasmania are making off with thousands of insects, stealing hives and threatening livelihoods.
This year a series of thefts has cost Tasmanian beekeepers an estimated $100,000.
Mole Creek beekeeper Shirley Stephens has lost hives in the latest 'sting' and says she suspects insiders are at work.
"A hive at the moment, if you take it to pollination, is worth anything from 80 to $100 per hive, but I'm afraid it must be from within our own industry that this is happening because John Smith or Joe Blow wouldn't dream of going near a bee hive," she said.

Stations look to unmanned planes over traditional labour
Remote control aeroplanes that can monitor stock, fences and water levels are becoming cost competitive with farm labour.
That is the finding of an MLA sponsored project being carried out by the Queensland Department of Primary Industries and the Kondinin Group.
The project is looking into technologies that can cut labour expenses on large cattle stations.
Les Zeller from the Queensland DPI says unmanned planes will make light work of everyday surveillance tasks.

Frost devastates Goulburn Valley fruit
Fruit prices could be set to rise, with one of Australia's main stone fruit growing regions devastated by a severe frost.
Victoria's Goulburn Valley, which is home to the nation's largest fruit processor SPC Ardmona, will lose an estimated $70 million this harvest.
Ian Bolitho from Fruit Growers Victoria says up to half of the 300,000 tonnes of fruit grown in the region has been wiped out.
"All the apricots have gone, they showing signs of starting to shrivel and drop off now, at least 50 per cent of the plum crop is gone and probably most of the nectarine crop, and probably 50 per cent of the peach crop," he said.
"We're just assessing on the fresh pears at the moment but they're not looking all that flash either."
Growers are now asking why the weather bureau did not give them any warning of the Sunday night frost.
An Internet-based forecasting service was set up in 2003 after a similar frost caused widespread damage.
But there was no warning issued on Sunday night.
Kevin Parkyn from the bureau says that was a mistake.
"I think the system is a good one. I think it's exceptional," he said.
"Unfortunately we missed this case which doesn't look good on our track record.
"As I said it sometimes can be a very fine line particularly with such intense vigorous windy conditions on the Sunday to have it drop out so rapidly is very unusual."
Elsewhere, growers say they do not expect to see major increases in the price of fruit, but believe the market will be affected.
Sympathetic Queensland grower Pat Wibaux says it is not the first time the weather has caused a disaster.
"It's not something that someone likes to see happen, but it occasionally does," he said.

Cotton growers offered refund if crop ploughed
For the first time in history, cotton growers have been offered a full refund on their seed costs if they are forced to plough in their crop due to a lack of rain.
Cotton Seed Distributors has developed the drought package to entice farmers to plant over the coming months, knowing they can recoup their costs if the season does not improve.
Company spokesman Adam Kay says the industry needs help.
"One of the things we could do was assist those growers that are wanting to have a little bit of a punt on things this season, putting some cotton in where they haven't got enough water at this stage or maybe when the price isn't that good," he said.

Water protection effort doesn't go far enough: farmer
The Federal Government's new effort to protect water resources is being criticised for not going far enough.
An Office of Water Resources will be established within the Prime Minister's department to provide and coordinate national water policy.
But Victorian farmer Mark Wootton, whose family has donated $10 million for a new Climate Institute that's been launched today, says the broader issue of climate change needs to be addressed.

Scientist pushes for more research into NT coral reefs
There has been a call for more research into coral reefs off the Northern Territory coastline.
Marine scientist Dr Victor Gomelyuk says climate change and cyclones have decimated some reefs in the Gulf of Carpenteria.
He says corals should be used as an early warning of destructive changes.
"The main threat is actually global temperature rising," he said.
"When sea temperature is raised above about 32 degrees it's almost lethal.
"Lots of other marine components of biota will be affected by these elevated temperatures and [there will be] other consequences of this elevated temperature you know.

AWB lawyer quizzed about secret documents
An AWB in house lawyer has been reduced to tears at the resumption of public hearings of the Cole inquiry in Sydney.
Witness Jessica Lyons has been quizzed about two previously secret documents released to the inquiry by the Federal Court.
The documents from January 2003 show exchanges between Blake Dawson and Waldren's solicitor Hazel Brassington and Ms Lyons.
They discuss changes to the freight arrangements of two wheat contracts for the Iraqi Grains Board.
When senior counsel assisting John Agius asked Ms Lyons who authorised the change, she told the inquiry she believed it was AWB marketing executive Chris Whitwell.
Earlier, Mr Whitwell and former AWB employee Michael Long made an application to keep secret, names of two legal advice documents, claiming their publication would prejudice them and affect the conduct of any possible future jury trial.
Commissioner Cole rejected their application.
Meanwhile AWB has increased estimated pool returns for this season's wheat crop.
Growers can expected to receive between four and $10 a tonne more.
Feed grain has seen the biggest lift, due to strong local demand.

British company to takeover Perth oil exploration company
Perth-based oil exploration company Hardman Resources has agreed to a takeover by British-based Tullow Oil.
Tullow Oil is offering just over $2 a share for the company, which is known for its offshore oil projects in developing countries.
Stock analyst Peter Strackensays says the offer has had a positive impact on Australian oil exploration stocks across the board.
"We've seen quite a few stocks bounce on that - Roc Oil, who shares interest in Mauritania with Hardman and Woodside and has other interests in China and other parts of West Africa," he said.

US calls for farm subsidies changes
US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns is calling for sweeping reforms to farm subsidies to head off a possible new challenge before the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
But a top farm group is opposing the move, in what is shaping up to be a major fight over US farm policy.
Brazil has already won a WTO case against US cotton subsidies.
Now Mr Johanns says Brazil may strike again.
"What they're after is our marketing loan program and our counter cyclical program," he said.
But the American Farm Bureau (AFB) and other groups say they have not heard this and bureau trade adviser Chris Garza says his group warns against premature concessions.
"If we go in and make any changes to the farm Bill now we could get a WTO, in which case, countries could ask us to do more," he said.

Citrus growers hoping for better orange prices
Citrus growers are hoping a fall in the production of valencia oranges will result in better prices.
The national crop is expected to fall by 25 per cent to under 200,000 tonnes due to frost damage earlier this year in South Australia and the Murray Valley.
In the Riverina region of New South Wales, production is tipped to be 90,000 tonnes, down from more than 120,000 last season.
Peter Morrish from Riverina Citrus says record prices of more than $2,500 a tonne are being paid for imported orange juice concentrate, so local growers are in a good bargaining position.
"There's discussions going on at the present time in terms of future contracts and that's looking positive on the growers' side at this stage, but unfortunately it's a wait and see," he said.

Miniature greenhouse trial proves effective in retaining water
Broad acre farmers in the future could find themselves using hundreds of miniature greenhouses to save soil moisture and improve growth rates in their crops.
Bronwyn Laycock from the Cooperative Research Centre for Polymers says by stretching clear plastic over seed-beds, growers can create an entire paddock of tiny greenhouses.
She says so far trials have shown the technique is effective at retaining water in dry cropping districts.
"What we're trying to do is put it down over the seed as it is sown and it traps moisture, and traps the heat under the film like a greenhouse," she said.
"[It] gives it a better growing environment and also it means that as it is growing, we're capturing all the water that's transpiring, we're capturing the water in the soil so we get a moister soil environment.

PM hits out at Murray Darling Basin efforts
The Prime Minister, John Howard, has accused the Labor governments in the eastern states of not doing enough to address the Murray Darling Basin's environmental problems.
It comes as the Commonwealth sets up a new Office of Water Resources, sparking suggestions it is taking steps to take over control of water from the states.
But Mr Howard says he prefers to cooperate with the states.
"But it's got to be collaboration that makes progress," he said.
"I'm very unhappy with the Murray Darling Basin. I don't think we're going fast enough, I don't think the Queensland, NSW and Victoria has the same interest as South Australia in making progress on that issue.
"And they can't say the Commonwealth is not doing its bit, we put in an extra $500 million out of the last Budget which we weren't really required to."
And 3,000 farmers in Victoria's Wimmera Mallee are expected to be eligible for water tank rebates this year.
As a result of the ongoing dry conditions, Grampians Wimmera Mallee Water will start water carting on Monday.

Sorghum prices rise
As concerns mount about feed grain supplies across Australia, sorghum prices have jumped nearly 20 per cent in a fortnight.
Sorghum is a major component of rations for cattle and pigs in feedlots.
Jim Cudmore, at Kerwee feedlot in southern Queensland, says his feed prices are now rising exponentially and that is already influencing competitiveness in countries like Japan.
"Our customers have been telling us for some time now that we are starting to lose our price competitiveness, in terms of product into that market," he said.

Govt rejects Goulburn Valley natural disaster calls
The Victorian Government will not be declaring the Goulburn Valley a natural disaster area.
Frosts ruined most of the area's stonefruit crops this week, with losses exceeding 300,000 tonnes.
Growers have called on the state and federal governments to declare the region a natural disaster area.
The Victorian Agriculture Minister, Bob Cameron, has rejected the call, but says exceptional circumstances applications from the area will be fast-tracked.
"When it comes to longer term arrangements, the preferable arrangement is exceptional circumstances," he said.

Wesfarmers to build LNG plant
Wesfarmers is to build a $138 million liquefied natural gas (LNG) plant at Kwinana, near Perth.
The plant will produce 175 tonnes per day of LNG for use in heavy haulage vehicles.
Two power stations will also be built at remote mine sites to provide energy for those operations.
Construction of the LNG plant will begin soon and it is scheduled to be commissioned in early 2008.
Wesfarmers energy managing director Tim Bult says the company is confident of expanding operations elsewhere in Australia.

Next phase of fishing industry buyout set to begin
The next stage of the national fishing industry buyout commences tomorrow.
Fishing towns are invited to apply for a share of $40 million, to assist them if they are affected by the buyout of 400 fishing licences.
Businesses can seek up to $100,000 each to close down or a quarter of a million dollars to redevelop.
Federal Fisheries Minister Eric Abetz says individual businesses and communities have until January 12 to apply for grants.
"Business that can no longer operate at all - they can apply for the business exit assistance, for those that say 'we can be still be viable if we can tweak our business but we need some assistance' well we've got the business development assistance," he said.
"For communities at large, come up with ideas as to how they might be able to develop something which will provide alternate employment then we're willing to assist those communities as well."
Meanwhile, the Australian Conservation Foundation has called for a worldwide ban on the sale of patagonian toothfish.
The call comes after the New South Wales District Court fined two crew members of a Cambodian-registered ship more than $100,000 for illegally taking the toothfish.
Denise Boyd, from the Conservation Foundation, says the penalty is insufficient and shows that the fishery can not be effectively managed.
"By shutting the fishery down and therefore having no legal product on the market it basically means that any product that does turn up on the market clearly does come from illegal, unreported and unregulated sources," she said.

Rally to highlight wool growers' frustrations
There is growing frustration about the options being provided to wool growers during the current woolpoll, with a crisis rally to be held next week in the central west of New South Wales.
Producers can have a say on the level of wool tax they pay, from zero to 3 per cent.
But Wellington producer Peter Barton says they must also be able to influence how the tax take is used.

Qld urged to take advantage of new GM technologies
One of Australia's leading experts in genetically modified (GM) crops says Queensland is in an unique position to take advantage of new technologies.
Queensland and the Northern Territory have not followed the other states in banning GM crops.
The CSIRO's plant industry deputy chief, Dr T J Higgins, says buyers overseas, such as Japan, are opening up to genetically modified products, despite voicing opposition in the past.
"The ironic thing is our major competitor in Canada produces GM canola, mixes it with the non-GM canola and sells it to Japan very competitively with Australia," Dr Higgins said.
"Australia does not get a premium for its non-GM canola in Japan. So I ask myself the question - why are we put at a potential disadvantage to our competitors?"
At the same time, a group of farmers on South Australia's Eyre Peninsula has called for the state's ban on GM food crops to be lifted, to help beat the problem of herbicide resistance.

Report highlights structural issues for Aboriginal pastoral companies
A report into the economic viability of Aboriginal pastoral companies in the Kimberley has found they are not structured to deliver sustainable profits.
The report, commissioned by Meat and Livestock Australia, surveyed a third of the 30 stations owned and operated by Aboriginal communities in north-western Australia.
Report co-author Peter McEntree says productivity is generally low and stocking rates, and land quality poor, compared to local non-Aboriginal cattle properties.
"One of the key issues and it's really a bit of a structural issue for a lot of Indigenous properties and that's just the issue of scale," he said.

Chile pushes for Australian wine industry cooperation
Australian researchers will soon be sharing information with one of our wine industry's major international competitors.
Charles Sturt University in New South Wales has signed a memorandum of understanding with the Institute of Agricultural Research in Chile.
Speaking through an interpreter, the Chilean Agriculture Minister Alvaro Rojas said the two countries could work together to develop Northern Hemisphere markets.
"The countries, especially in the Southern Hemisphere like New Zealand, Australia and Chile, need to be working together," he said.

Education the answer to reducing road fatalities, say truckies
There is debate in the Northern Territory about whether to introduce speed limits along the Stuart Highway.
It is believed authorities may be considering introducing a limit of 110 kilometres an hour to reduce road fatalities.
But the Australian Trucking Association's Peter Goed says the answer is more education about the risk of fatigue.
He says it would actually be more dangerous to limit the speeds of motorists trying to overtake road trains.

Drought predicted to worsen
There is another gloomy forecast today that suggests the drought is set to worsen.
The weather bureau is predicting a hotter than average lead-up to summer right across the country and below-average rain in most of eastern Australia.
The seasonal outlook from October to December says there is up to a 70 per cent chance that northern Queensland, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania will be drier than normal.
Bureau climatologist Blair Trewin says temperatures will be generally higher than normal.
"The outlook is leaning quite strongly towards warm conditions in much of the country both daytime maximum and overnight minimum temperatures," he said.

Drought takes its toll
The drought's effect is worsening daily.
The winter grain crop in NSW is on a knife's edge and almost half of it could fail without rain in the next seven to 10 days.
The state's Primary Industries Minister, Ian Macdonald, says dry winds and no rain have combined to make the worst conditions possible.
His department is downsizing crop predictions and now expects less than 2.5 million hectares to be harvested, less than half the annual average.

Harsh weather
In Victoria, harsh weather is taking its toll on grain crops in the Mallee and Wimmera regions.
The combination of high temperatures and dry winds, followed by frosts, has some growers considering harvesting nothing this year.
Department of Primary Industries agronomist Rob Sonogan says the damage has been patchy.
"What we're really seeing as an average across the whole zone is somewhere about 30 per cent of average yield expectation and that's daily decreasing," he said.

Poor season
In WA, the poor season is being blamed for a 23 per cent fall in the number of livestock entered in this year's Royal Agricultural Show which starts in Perth this weekend.
The Royal Agricultural Society's Deane Allen says many farmers will spend their money on livestock feed, rather than taking animals to the show.
"I would suggest, from the sheep point of view, it's been very difficult for people to get feed," he said.

NRMA rejects petrol companies' petrol transport costs claims
The NRMA has rejected claims by petrol companies that transport costs are to blame for higher fuel costs at country service stations.
The head of the motoring body, Alan Evans, has told the Senate inquiry into petrol pricing that consolidation of retailers and outlets means prices will only get higher.
He says petrol retailers must be forced to be transparent about why their rural stations charge up to 20 cents a litre more than city outlets.
"Even the oil companies themselves say three cents a litre would account for the freight costs," he said.
"When you look at differentials as we had in the last week between Sydney and Wagga, of nearly 20 cents a litre, 19, you had differentials of 14 between Wagga and Albury on the same day on the average price of fuel, you can't explain it by freight."
But there are bright prospects for an alternative fuel.
An Australian company has been awarded $2 million by the United States Energy Department to trial an alternative hydrogen fuel blend for vehicle engines.
Eden Energy says some American buses will be powered by its hythane mix.
Hythane blends 7 per cent hydrogen with 93 per cent natural gas.
Eden Energy executive chairman Greg Solomon says the US particularly wants the technology because of stringent emissions standards being introduced next year.

Group hits out at inequality between urban, rural training facilities
The body which represents TAFEs says inequality between urban and rural training facilities is contributing to rural skills shortages.
It wants the federal and state governments to consider proposals including more cooperation between urban and rural TAFEs, setting up specialist technical schools for year 11 and 12 students and establishing a new trade diploma.
Martin Riordan, from TAFE Directors Australia, says student numbers have fallen by 67,000 in the past five years and country institutes in particular are not attractive enough.
"There is massive discrimination within the system against rural and regional [areas]," he said.

NT fishermen reach buyout deal
Up to six northern prawn trawling licences may have been bought back by the Federal Government.
Darwin fishermen Tony Thiel says he is relieved to have reached a deal in the first round of the national industry buyout.
He has been unable to sell 10 tonnes of banana prawns caught earlier this year.
But Mr Thiel says restructuring would not have been necessary, if the Government had done more to limit imports of cheaper inferior prawns.
"I don't believe they will need restructuring any more. What our problem is, they can't sell the product and that is the main thing now," he said.
"They could stop imports. They stopped it in the states, the industry, the fishermen stopped it importing and duping of prawns."
Meanwhile, Australia's patagonian tooth fishermen have rejected calls to close down the fishery.
This week, two illegal fishermen were fined more than $100,000 for poaching.
The Australian Conservation Foundation says the penalty is no deterrent and a worldwide ban on the sale of the toothfish would be more effective.
But Les Scott from Petuna Sealord says that would punish responsible operators.

Company says SA Zircon grade among best in world
Mining of zircon in the far west of South Australia is a step closer, with the discovery of what could be the world's richest grades of the mineral.
The Adelaide Resources and Iluka Resources joint venture has announced that the Tripitaka deposit north-west of Ceduna, contains about 650,000 tonnes of zircon, which is used to make ceramics, glass and aluminium.
Adelaide Resources chairman Keith Yates values the deposit at about $650 million.
"The zircon content of the heavy mineral component of Tripitaka is in the order of 65 per cent and 65 per cent by world standards is absolutely extraordinary as far as the heavy mineral component of the deposit is concerned," he said.

AWI happy with current marketing funding
Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) says it is happy with the level of funding for marketing, despite some grower fears that it is not enough.
AWI is recommending a 2 per cent levy in the upcoming wool poll which would see $35 million spent on product development and marketing.
AWI chairman Ian McLachlan wants to ensure the marketing program is effective before committing more funds.
"If that does work as well as we hope it will, it's not beyond the realms of contemplation to have another poll before the three years is up," he said.

Milk company to draw up shortlist of buyers
A merger or takeover has not been ruled out for one of Australia's main milk companies.
Tatura Milk, which controls around 5 per cent of Australia's supply, is undergoing a financial review after posting a $6 million pre-tax loss last year.
Supplier meetings were held this week in Victoria's Goulburn Valley to explain options put forward by several parties interested in Tatura.
Company chairman Ian Bertram says a shortlist will be drawn up before any decisions are made about mergers or funding help.
"At this stage we can't confirm who they are, but we are negotiating with 10 to 12 interested parties," he said.

Canegrowers backs call for voluntary destruction of smut affected cane
The Canegrowers organisation supports the Queensland Government's call for cane farmers to voluntarily destroy crops severely affected by sugar cane smut.
The disease has been detected on more than 60 properties in south-east Queensland since June.

Dept defends performance of Indigenous pastoral enterprises
The organisation that supports the development of Indigenous pastoral enterprises in the Kimberley has defended the performance of the organisations.
A Meat and Livestock Australia report into the economic viability of Aboriginal pastoral companies in northern Western Australia found productivity and stocking rates were generally poor, compared with non-Indigenous owned properties.
But Russell Show from WA's Agriculture and Food Department says the report is too negative.
"The report's accurate but it's not complete," he said.
"And in fact in the review it suggests that there are uses, multiple uses that Aboriginal communities want on their properties and that those uses by their nature maybe mutually exclusive but we've discovered that they're not.

Black wattle tree research may help in greenhouse gas fight
New research into black wattle trees may help the fight against greenhouse gases.
Scientists at the Victorian Department of Primary Industries are trialling compounds found in black wattle, as part of research on reducing methane emissions from cows.
The compounds are known as "tannins" and are being trialled in a new drench that has the ability to change the way cows digest feed.
Scientist Martin Auldist says previous trials have found the tannins cut methane emissions from sheep.
"Overseas studies have shown that tannins from black wattle can reduce methane emission by about 13 per cent," he said.

Cole blasts AWB for withholding crucial email
A furious oil-for-food inquiry Commissioner Terence Cole has blasted lawyers for AWB following the overnight production of a crucial email.
After an hour-long delay to proceedings, Commissioner Cole entered the court room in a fiery mood.
He demanded an explanation from AWB about how the August 2002 email and its attachments from the head of UK-based Ronly Holdings, to AWB in-house lawyer, Rosemary Peevey, was not produced months ago.
A contrite counsel for AWB, James Judd QC, told the commission the email was a crucial document and had it been produced months ago, the length of the Cole inquiry would have been shortened.

Flugge admits transport fees knowledge
Former AWB chairman Trevor Flugge has told the Cole inquiry into the oil-for-food scandal he did know about transport fees being paid to a Jordanian trucking company.
When Mr Flugge stepped into the witness box he indicated he was having trouble hearing senior counsel assisting John Agius QC.
The problem soon cleared and the questioning became robust.
Mr Agius asked the witness: "Were you aware in September 2002 that AWB was paying a trucking fee?"
Mr Flugge replied: "Yes, I believe I was."
Mr Agius continued: "To whom did you believe AWB was contractually bound to paying the trucking fee," Mr Flugge answered, "to a Jordanian trucking company".
But when Mr Agius quizzed the former AWB chairman about UK-based Ronly Holdings, who funnelled the trucking fee to Alia on AWB's behalf, Mr Flugge told the inquiry he did not know at that time the payments were made through an indirect process.
Meanwhile AWB says growers should be reassured by its decision to wear millions of dollars in legal costs relating to the Cole inquiry and the Australian Tax Office.
The Grains Council of Australia previously called on AWB to confirm that growers would not have to pay the bills out of the national wheat pool.
AWB's Brendon Stewart says the wheat exporter's corporate division will now shoulder the costs.
"The key decisions that we announced yesterday are around protection the entitlements of the 05/06 pools, the 06/07 pools and importantly the operation of future pools," he said.
"In terms of under a trust structure, [it] should give growers all the assurance they need in terms of costs that are going to come out of those pools."
AWB has also dropped its wheat production forecast to between 12 to 15 million tonnes, based on the poor crop conditions.
Grains analyst Malcolm Bartholomaeus says a small winter crop will increase local competition and growers will probably abandon AWB's pools to take advantage of good domestic prices.

Gold mine set to finally open
A massive new gold mine at Lake Cowal in central western New South Wales is finally opening today, 10 years after it was first proposed.
Environmental concerns kept the project on hold.
The owners and operators of the mine have had to overcome many hurdles to allow today's opening to take place.
Lake Cowal is the largest inland lake in the state, but is dry most of the time.
The mine development had been stopped several times over cyanide concerns, Aboriginal issues and the potential environmental impact.
The first gold pour took place in April of this year.
Canadian owner Barrick says 2,010 permanent staff are now employed.

Water allocations reduced for Murray irrigators mid-season
For the first time in history, the South Australian Government will reduce water allocations for River Murray irrigators in the middle of the season.

Govt blasted for not helping frost-devastated growers
The Victorian Government is under fire for not providing financial help to regions hit by devastating frosts earlier this year.
The Government yesterday announced measures to help fruit growers in the Goulburn Valley, who lost at least half their stonefruit crops to frost earlier this week.
Back in June, the Murray Valley lost $17 million worth of citrus to frost.
But John Tesoriero, from the Murray Valley Citrus Board, says calls for help from growers in his region have gone unheeded.
"This particular area though the Sunraysia Citrus Growers did write to Minister Cameron requesting that he come inspect the damage for himself," he said.

Dry weather forcing Indonesian cattle feedlots to cart water
The Islamic festival of Ramadan is under way and a prolonged dry in Indonesia is forcing some cattle feedlots to cart water.
Stored dam water is disappearing quickly for the largest importer of Australian cattle.
But Greg Pankhurst of Agrogiri Perkasa says at least the cattle fatten faster when it is not raining.
"Extremely dry, unbelievably dry. We have a wet and dry season like the Top End of Australia, but we have not had rain here now for two months, which is very unusual for the wet season," he said.

Vaile outlines trade achievements
Outgoing Trade Minister Mark Vaile says while world trade talks have been disappointing, he has delivered benefits to farmers.
Mr Vaile is swapping portfolios with Transport Minister Warren Truss today.
He says putting agriculture at the centre of world trade talks, free trade deals with the US and other countries, and forcing Europe to remove some sugar subsidies have been victories.
"Achieving that win saw the EU having to remove the export subsidies from 4 million tonnes of sugar annually and it has seen a significant increase in the global price of sugar," he said.

Minister says battle ahead to meet China FTA deadline
The Federal Agriculture Minister says Australia has a tough battle ahead to meet the deadline to broker a free trade deal with China.
The two countries have agreed to a one to two year timeframe to negotiate the deal, but China is hesitant to give ground on agriculture.
Peter McGauran has been meeting Chinese leaders this week to push Australia's case and says high tariffs on Australian farm exports must be addressed.
"Prime Minister Howard and Premier Wen as head of government of China have urged all departments and ministers to set a timetable of one to two years," he said.
"That is an ambitious undertaking but is one that we strive towards.

Ban on some rodeo events welcomed
Members of Rodeo Tasmania have welcomed bans on some rodeo events under the Tasmanian Government's proposed new animal cruelty laws.
New laws will ban the riding of sheep and poddy calves, while events must have a vet in attendance at all times.
Rodeo Tasmania's Annette Reed says the practices known as poddy calf riding and mutton busting are not common in the state.
"Very few rodeos run them, we're not at all upset at the fact that they have gone on the chopping block," she said.

Sports lovers facing big weekend
It is shaping up as a big weekend across the country for sports lovers, with four states battling it out in the AFL and NRL season deciders.
It is a tough weekend for Queensland NRL supporters, faced with backing the local Brisbane Broncos, or a team full of ex-Queenslanders, Melbourne Storm.
But there will be no fence sitting in the north Queensland community of Nebo.
"The Broncos are going to win by at least 12 points and I think the reason they'll win is they'll play 80 minutes of football right through it," one supporter said.
"I hope the Broncos win but I think the Storm will do it, they're just a tough all-round team," another said.
"I'll be with my youngest daughter who's a Melbourne supporter on the night so I'll probably have to go for Melbourne if I want a bed for the night," a resident said
"It'd have to be the Broncos because their Queenslanders," said another.
In WA, AFL supporters are excited about the chances of the West Coast Eagles in their clash against Sydney.
This group of country kids from the state's south reckon the locals will do them proud.
"I reckon they'll win by about five points - three points," one said.
"Just win I reckon - about 10 points," said another.

Ute muster extra special for WA couple
Thousands of people are heading for Deniliquin in southern New South Wales for the national ute muster.
It will be an extra special trip for Western Australian vegetable grower Rob, who will kick off the weekend by marrying his fiance Iris.
Rob says it was a deep passion and love of utes that brought them together.
"We were going to get married before we come on the trip but then one of our friends decided well why don't you get married at the ute muster," he said.
"So we've organised it for the day before and we've been down the track a couple of times before and finally we've sort of met somebody that's got exactly the same interests, she's more into the truck than me at times, and well it's, fun."

Murray water users warned to expect cuts
The Murray Darling Basin Ministerial Council has released dire predictions about future water allocations in the river system.
With the worst inflows into the Murray River since Federation, high-security water users, who usually receive 100 per cent of their water rights, are being warned to expect cuts in coming months.
Jo Haw from the local government-based Murray Darling Association says farmers are selling water rights in desperation.
"The bottom line is they are doing it against every ounce of their fibre," she said.
"I think people who are putting their water rights on the market now, some of them are very unwilling sellers but they have no choice.

Wool production drop blamed on drought
The drought is being blamed for an estimated 6 per cent drop in wool production across Australia this season.
Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) says the forecast has fallen 27 million kilograms to 434 million, because of a lack of rain, pasture growth, and the fact that there's no end to the drought in sight.
Chairman of AWI's production forecasting committee Dr David James agrees it will be a tough season for growers.
"Partly it's due to the fact that feed production will be down," he said.
"For example ABARE is forecasting that cereal production levels will be down by about 30 per cent and another concern is in fact the capacity of farmers to provide water to their stock, and on top of that of course there are cash flow factors which will make it difficult."
The dry conditions are forcing many sheep farmers to begin their shearing earlier than normal.
And the bigger supply is hurting wool prices, with the market suffering its biggest drop since April.
Tony Kidman from Quality Wool says many farmers can not afford to store wool until prices rise.
"We appear to be having less people holding onto wool at this moment, people looking for more of a cash flow with their wool," he said.
"I think the drought conditions are forcing people to shear a bit earlier and sell their sheep a bit earlier than they have in the past."
International factors are also affecting wool prices.
Bill Cowley from the Australian Wool Network says the market drop is disappointing, especially when the Australian dollar is weaker.
"China do most of their business in US dollars and when we see the US currency fall, we would normally see a firm to slightly dearer market here in Australia, but the bids that are coming from the Chinese at this particular time are getting lower and lower, and there's some resistance to the higher price that they are having to pay in the US," he said.

Farmers urged to talk about problems
Drought-affected farmers are being told to swallow their pride and ask for help to get through this season.
Victorian rural outreach worker Ivan Lister says more farmers are seeking support than during the 2002 drought.
He says in many cases talking about problems can help.
"The word that we use is stay connected and we try to promote that amongst all the communities," he said.
"They'll either be talking to each other in family situations, talking to the neighbour, asking each other how they're going.
"Be aware that a lot of people are suffering at this time and will continue to struggle.

Recycling scheme being commissioned
Tasmania's biggest water recycling scheme is being commissioned today to provide irrigation water to farms and golf courses.
More than 2,500 megalitres of treated sewage water will be diverted from the Derwent River.
City engineer John Stevens from Clarence Council says the $16 million scheme will prevent up to 80 tonnes of nitrogen and 25 tonnes of phosphorous ending up in the river each year.
He says so far 25 water users have signed up but with the current climate outlook, perceptions of recycled water are changing quickly.

Fresh concerns raised about 3G technology in rural areas
New concerns have been raised about the future of mobile phone services in rural Australia, once the current CDMA network is phased out.
Deputy PM Mark Vaile has warned Telstra he will not accept any deterioration in services, once so-called 3G technology replaces the current system.
The system was to provide broadband Internet and other technology but Telstra says initially, the network might not be that advanced.
Telecommunications analyst Paul Budde says the 3G system will only be able to provide voice calls.

Publisher seeks more flexibility in media ownership law changes
Australia's largest publisher of rural newspapers is calling for more flexibility in cross media ownership rules.
The Federal Government is planning to overturn most of the current restrictions but maintain some regulations in regional areas to ensure a diverse range of media outlets.
But John Fairfax, chairman of Rural Press Limited, wants to see fundamental change.

Honeymoon uranium mine gets environmental green light
Final environmental approval has been granted for South Australia's controversial fourth uranium mine.
The SA branch of the Environment Protection Authority (EPA) has granted licences for both mining and milling of uranium at the Honeymoon mine west of Broken Hill.
Concerns had been raised about potential ground water contamination from the mine's plan to extract the mineral from rock using acid.
But Keith Baldry from the EPA says the process is environmentally sound.

Nickel price hits record levels
The price of nickel is climbing to record levels as demand increases and global supplies dwindle.
The base metal has doubled in price in the past six months and is now fetching almost $14 a pound.

Chicken meat import law review prompts health concerns
A peak poultry group says important human health concerns have been ignored in a review of the laws governing chicken meat imports.
Biosecurity Australia released a draft import risk analysis into imports in June.
But Dr Andreas Dubs, from the Chicken Meat Federation of Australia, is concerned the draft does not exclude countries which use 'human' antibiotics to grow chickens.
He fears it could lead to consumers developing a resistance to the antibiotics.
"In Australia we don't use antibiotics in animals that are primarily used in humans, so, an antibiotic like fluoroquinolone, which is a very important antibiotic as a last weapon in human health, is not allowed to be used in Australia, whereas it has been used in a lot of other countries," he said.

Rain delays sugar harvest
Too much rain has delayed the sugar harvest in northern New South Wales.
Mills are facing a drop in production, with an unusually wet season making crushing difficult and reducing sugar content levels.
Greg Petersen from the Condong Mill near Murwillumbah says the harvest could now drag on until early next year.
"This year has been particularly difficult with the amount of lost time we've had with the wet weather," he said.

Recent frost hit vineyards
Wine grape growers in Victoria's high country say their vineyards have been badly damaged by recent severe frost.
The frost, which caused widespread devastation in orchards in the Goulburn Valley, also hit the state's east.
Gippsland wine grape growers Howard Reddish says he has lost at least 50 per cent of his grapes but it is hard to know the true cost of the damage just yet.
"We're going to have to do something to the vines now to remove the dead and unwanted shoots," he said.

Countries approve global macadamia association
Macadamia nut growers hope a new global body will ensure other countries help to pay for the industry's research and promotion.
As the world's leading producer of macadamias, Australian growers largely foot the bill, but a new global association has been approved by the 25 countries which grow the nut.
Queensland researcher Ian McConachie says it will provide better communication and even out the costs.

Cane toads helping to reduce feral pigs, insect numbers
Pest animals are having a field day on some farms in the Northern Territory.
South of Darwin, at Batchelor, one farm is losing at least three tonnes of premium champagne melons a year to dingoes.
But fruit grower David Thompson says the arrival of cane toads has reduced feral pig numbers and insect problems.
"It's a godsend to us in a way because we get a lot of the insects in the garden, because they got a really long tongue on them and they seem to never miss," he said.
"When they whip their tongue out they got the insect, that's it. Mainly moths, they will eat crickets and things like that as well.

Weed killers suspended because of crop damage
Authorities have suspended the use of 24 weed killers due to concern about the damage they are causing to horticulture crops.
Known as 2,4-D short chain esters, the chemicals are most commonly used to kill weeds in grain crops.
The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority says despite control measures to stop spray drift, the chemicals can still evaporate and travel long distances.
Pesticides program manager Eva Bennett Jenkins says chemical companies will need to prove their products are safe but until then the horticulture sector needs to be protected.

Shearers seek pay rise
Australia's shearers want a 4 per cent wage rise under their federal award.
The Shearers and Rural Workers Union has recommended a new minimum shearing rate of $218.31 per 100 sheep, an increase of around $9.00.
Shed hand rates would also rise.
General secretary John Morgan says members have been issued with common law agreements detailing the new rates and hopes wool growers will be prepared to sign them.
"It's not a great impost on the employers," he said.
"Some people have suggested that it's not enough, but at the same time we recognise wool growers aren't getting a fair deal in relation to their wool prices and we understand that.
"But they seem to forget that our people have got to travel large distances to get to their places of employment at great cost and we've got to be remunerated for our labour and our costs."
The industry is refusing to comment on the changes.
Meanwhile shearers across Australia are benefiting from a price war for their tools of the trade.
The price of combs and cutters have been cut by up to a third and the price of some new handpieces on the market are half that of established brands
Queensland shearing contractor Ian Bateman says he is happy about competition coming from China.
"I think it's a good thing, for the simple fact is, it's like anything else, if anybody gets a monopoly, they just seem to charge or do whatever they want to do and I reckon the third company into the business will definitely make the other companies brighten their foot work up," he said.

Australia's highways below standard: survey
The first independent audit of the nation's highways shows half are below standard and may be unsafe to drive on.
The Australian Automobile Association surveyed 18,000 kilometres of the national highway in all states except New South Wales and gave each one a star rating.
Worst on the list were the Bruce Highway on Queensland's Sunshine Coast and the Calder Highway in Victoria between Bendigo and Kyneton.
The association's executive director, Lachlan Macintosh, says half of the highways were rated three stars and more likely to cause deaths.
"In a three star road there are still some deficiencies in the road features; poor median protection, perhaps too many intersections per kilometres of road, poorly designed curves, not enough markings on the road," he said.
"So those three star roads could be better, we could see some pretty inexpensive treatment to make them better and that's fairly important."

Telstra to consider objections when deciding on country pay phones
Telstra says it can not guarantee that some country communities will not lose their pay phones.
The company says it is permitted to remove some phones which are being underused and has agreement from the Federal Government.
But Jeff Booth from Telstra Countrywide says local objections will be considered.
"Where there are very, very low call rates, like one call per month or something similar, and where it's costing thousands of dollars to maintain a pay phone we'd probably use our discretion in that regard," he said.

Truss expecting to discuss trade issues from Aust
Australia's new Trade Minister Warren Truss says he expects to travel far less than his predecessor Mark Vaile.
Mr Vaile has left the trade position to focus on transport and domestic issues surrounding the future of the Nationals.
Mr Truss says he is hoping he can do far more future trade negotiations from Australia.
"It will be necessary to talk to people in other parts of the world but I still regard very much my responsibilities to my own electorate, to the people of Australia as a high priority," he said.

Rot destroys pink lady exports
An unusual fruit skin condition not seen in Australia before is hurting exporters of pink lady apples from Western Australia.
The rot has destroyed about 40 per cent of this year's exports to the United Kingdom and there are fears more could be rejected in a shipment of 800 tonnes of fruit currently on its way.
Experts from Australia and the UK say they have never seen browning this early in the season and are trying to find what is causing it.
Angelo Logiudice from the WA Apple and Pear Council says it has having a huge impact.
"In real terms 35 to 40 per cent loss after packing is huge losses because you've already sustained some losses as you are sorting fruit for export packing, so this is going to be huge for growers," he said.

NT mango growers seek alternative transport methods
Despite the Top End's heat and humidity, some growers are considering sending mangoes to market without refrigeration.
A shortage of refrigeration trucks means growers might have to consider sending fruit south overnight when temperatures are cooler.
The Horticultural Association's Tracey Leo says it is high risk and will only be used as a last resort.
"We have predicted a shortfall of about 125 vans in the peaks of the season, when melons and mangoes are coming in, in their peak," she said.
"You know the trees are coming into higher production, we are going to be looking at higher volumes and the availability of refrigerated trucks in the Territory is always going to be an issue. So any transport methods that we can look into are good."

Reef review recommendations disappoint fishermen
Commercial operators near the Great Barrier Reef are disappointed with a recommendation that fishing bans remain in place for another seven years.
The federal review followed industry anger at being banned from fishing a third of the reef two years ago to protect fish stocks.
The review says there should be no change to the ban, which has angered Russell Anderson from the Queensland Seafood Industry Association.

Rock lobster prices hit 5-year high
Prices for rock lobsters in the southern fishing zone have hit a five year high just days after the opening of the season.
Along the South Australian coast from Robe to Port Macdonnell prices range between $40 and $48 a kilogram, nearly $10 higher than this time last year.
Lionel Carrison, from the South East Professional Fishermen's Association, says supplies are low at this time of year, but the high prices are not expected to last.
"I guess everybody was anxious for new supplies," he said.

Website to help drought-stricken farmers
A website is being launched for drought-stricken farmers in Victoria to help each other through the summer.
Farmers will be able to use the Internet to advertise available feed or labour with the site expected to be up and running within two weeks.
Doug Chant from the United Dairyfarmers of Victoria says the site will put farmers in touch with a wide network of people and resources.
"Basically it will be feed that will be available, farmers that have feed whether it be hay, silage, grain, will have the opportunity of putting it on the web," he said.
"Anything to do with helping farmers through these very difficult times, it gives other farmers in other parts of the state the opportunity of being able to help out."

Sheep take over Hay street
A mob of 1,500 sheep has taken over the main street of Hay, in western New South Wales this morning, re-enacting boom times in the wool industry.
The sheep are needed for the Australian Shearing and Woolhandling Championships at the end of the week and rather than truck them in organisers have decided to re-live a part of the town's history.
ShearOutback director Kim Biggs says the spectacle has not been seen for more than 70 years.

Shearer sets unofficial world record
A South Australian shearer has set an unofficial world record by shearing 1,054 merino lambs in 40 hours.
Gary Hebberman from Jamestown, in the state's mid-north, used the marathon to raise money for his local sporting complex and a childhood cancer charity.
While previous record attempts have featured cross bred lambs, he chose merinos, because that is what he is used to shearing.
"I was brought up on merinos, so it makes it a bit easier for me," he said.
"It is harder, never ever been done in merino lambs before, it's been done in cross breds, so we just went with it, run with it and see how we went. I didn't look back."

Govt promises major farm policy changes
The Federal Government has promised major changes to future farm policy in Australia.
It has accepted 52 recommendations made by the Corish Report earlier this year, including world trade, biosecurity, food standards, drought preparation and land and water management.
Three recommendations were rejected, including tax concessions for rural areas, importing unskilled migrant workers and centralising power over transport infrastructure.
Despite those knock backs, head of the review Peter Corish says it is a landmark win.

Live cattle exports to Egypt to resume
Australia's peak livestock industry bodies have welcomed an agreement to resume live cattle exports to Egypt.
Shipments were halted after the broadcast of footage of cattle having their tendons slashed to restrain them at an Egyptian abattoir.
The Australian and Egyptian governments have signed an agreement to track all Australian cattle until they are slaughtered at three abattoirs.
At the abattoir where the cattle were filmed, Minister for Agriculture Peter McGauran says an oversee will be appointed to ensure Australian standards are met.

Cash incomes for beef producers halved
A new report says the cash income for beef producers has been halved in the past financial year.
The Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) says the figures reflect a trend for producers to hold off selling large numbers of cattle in 2005-06.
Rhonda Treadwell from ABARE'S farm survey and analysis branch says producers have been attempting to build up herd numbers.
"Essentially the farm cash incomes have fallen quite considerably and that is mainly because of the incredibly big build up of cattle numbers across a lot of beef cattle properties, so their profit hasn't fallen as much as their cash income," she said.
But those attempts to build up herds are now being thwarted by the on-going drought, with producers starting to sell large numbers of cattle.
In north-west New South Wales, producer Graham Wilson says his greatest worry is finding enough water for his cattle.
"We haven't had any inflow into our dams for over 12 months and we're getting very critical," he said.
"Our bores on average have gone from about 800-900 gallons an hour down to 200 gallons an hour.
"We need about 40,000 litres of water a day.

Wool growers unenthusiastic about shearers' proposed wage rise
Wool growers say they are not keen to support a proposed 4 per cent increase to shearers' wages.
The Shearers and Rural Workers Union says it has recommended "modest" new rates, with a $9 increase per 100 sheep.
Growers will be asked to sign common law agreements to pay the new rates from October 31.
But the executive director of WoolProducers, Greg Weller, says growers need to remember that the rise is not set in concrete.
"They're entitled to be able to put forward a view to their members on what they believe should be the appropriate rate," he said.
"And I don't think it's helpful for either shearers, and particularly wool growers, if there's a suggestion that there is some rate out there other than what's actually in the award.

New licences to double SA oil, gas exploration area
The area under exploration for new oil and gas deposits in South Australia will double, after the approval of eight new exploration licences.
The exploration area will increase to 140,000 square kilometres, including the Arckaringa Basin near Coober Pedy in the far north.
The company SAPEX has been awarded the licences and managing director Andrew Andrejewskis says any finds will help other mining projects.
"We're looking at the major resource projects that are occurring in that general vicinity," he said

Chemical ban will see return to old-fashioned farming: grain growers
Grain growers say they will be forced to return to old-fashioned and inefficient farming methods, due to a new chemical ban.
The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority has banned the use of 24 weed killers containing chemicals known as 2,4-D short chain esters, due to concerns about contamination of vineyards and horticultural crops.
Garry Hansen from the South Australian Farmers Federation says grain growers will be forced to use more expensive chemicals, which they cannot afford in the current climate.

Fodder shortage starts to show in key growing regions
There is more evidence of a looming shortage of fodder, due to dry conditions in the nation's key growing regions.
The Australian Fodder Industry Association says apart from the north coast of New South Wales and parts of Queensland hay crops need a good drink.
Executive officer Colin Peace says some grain and canola crops are being baled, but overall production will be down.
"The lucerne hay is going to be like hens teeth because there's not the irrigation water that there was say after the last 02/03 drought," he said.
"That would be well into the $200 per tonne on farm.

Demand for water tanks increases
The drought is also increasing demand for water tanks from farmers.
They are not being used to collect rainwater, but to hold water being trucked in to properties across Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland and South Australia.
Ross Hendy from Tankworld in north-west Victoria says around 250 tanks are being sold each week, and there is a six-week wait for them.

New irrigation model saving water
A water cooperative in Western Australia is being held up as a model example for the irrigation sector.
The Harvey Water Cooperative in south-west Western Australia has replaced open irrigation channels with pipes, creating water savings of about 25 per cent each year.
The saved water is piped to Perth to be used in the urban area.
Dan Norton has been named Rural Achiever of the Year at the Royal Show for his contribution to the cooperative, and he hopes others can benefit from the project.
"By piping the system and eliminating the irrigation channels you cut those losses by 25-30 per cent, which is [the] world's best practice for an open channel system," he said.

Global demand boosts exports of dairy goats
Growing global demand for dairy products is helping to boost exports of Australian dairy goats.
Argentina and Mexico have been big buyers to expand their local goat milk industries.
Now demand is emerging from Asia, Yemen and Papua New Guinea.
Jane Hewlett from Tasmania's Dairy Goat Society says there is a growing acceptance of dairy foods, particularly in Taiwan and China.
"Originally dairy products were not high on their list of food," she said.

North-west WA worried about biosecurity risks
In far north Western Australia, farmers who want to develop new luxury bed and breakfast accommodation in the Ord River irrigation area will now have to take biosecurity risks into account.
The Shire of Wyndham East Kimberley is amending its Town Planning Act to protect the region's agriculture, which is highly regarded because of its isolation.
It is worried about the threat of pests and diseases that could be brought in by tourists.
Vaughan Davies from Tourism Western Australia says it is the first time biosecurity has played such a major role.

Australian consortium launches new beef marketing strategy
A big push into 4,000 Japanese supermarkets has been launched by Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) and the Australian Agricultural Company.
Qantas and Wolf Blass are also joining the marketing strategy, to promote Aussie beef in the lead-up to Christmas.
MLA's managing director David Palmer says it is a unique marketing plan to snare ongoing commitment from tough Japanese consumers, and fight off competition from the US.
"It's an initiative to help continue to drive that loyalty, to help to continue to hold shelf space here in the Japanese retail market," he said.

Pollen from feral olives can cause 'severe respiratory problems'
The expansion of olive production across the country could be leading to human health problems.
The Cooperative Research Centre for Australian Weed Management says leaving fruit on trees after harvesting is causing feral olives to spread outside the grove.
Chief executive Rachel McFadyen says the pollen from feral olives can cause severe respiratory problems.
"Olive pollen is quite a severe allergen, that's to say if people breath it they develop an allergy to it, and then they start to suffer from hay fever and sinusitis and eventually perhaps asthma," she said.

Govt has no major greenhouse gas strategy: expert
A leading climate change expert has told a summit on alternative fuels that the Federal Government has no far reaching strategy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The former head of atmospheric research at the CSIRO, Dr Graeme Pearman, says Australia will face growing international pressure to meet targets and it does not have any in place.
The NRMA is pushing for an alternative fuels task force, challenging the Government to fund it.
Dr Pearman says if politicians do not set aside their electoral aspirations, Australia faces an immediate crisis.

Ex-NFF boss considers entering federal politics
The former president of the National Farmers Federation (NFF), Peter Corish, has confirmed he is thinking about running as a candidate in next year's federal election.
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says the Nationals would welcome the former leader, but Mr Corish says he is yet to make up his mind.
He believes it would be logical to run in the new New South Wales seat which incorporates the seat held by former deputy PM John Anderson.
The National party has welcomed an apparent softening in the Federal Government's plans to allow greater powers for cross-media ownership in rural areas.
Communications Minister Helen Coonan says she is prepared to listen to proposed changes to the new ownership laws, to ensure radio, television and newspapers are not owned by one company in the same region.
Nationals' MP Paul Neville says members are hoping to convince the Minister to protect rural media.

Farmers air mining worries
The search for copper, cobalt, nickel and uranium near the Northern Territory town of Batchelor is worrying some local farmers.
Compass Resources has revived exploration near the town, originally built to service the nation's first uranium mine, Rum Jungle, in the 1950s.
Small rural blocks have been developed since then, including a commercial vegetable and fruit farm.
Compass's community manager Tracker Tilmouth says they have yet to reach agreement over how to share resources, including water.
"Because of where the mine is located we have a very large water supply that we have to de-water, so we will be looking at a whole range of activity that we can complement their water supply or whatever," he said.

Barrick up-beat about gold price rise
The price of gold has slipped yet again overnight, but the world's biggest gold miner remains confident about the long-term market.
Barrick Gold Corporation is standing by its prediction of a gold price of $US700 an ounce by the end of the year.
That is a fair way above the current price of $US566.
But chief executive Greg Wilkins says not enough gold is being produced globally to replace current reserves, which should drive the price back up.
"Clearly one of the challenges for the industry and for the viability is trying to manage the cost," he said.
"If gold prices come back down below $500 an ounce it won't take all that long for the supply side to shrink more rapidly than we're seeing today which in turn I think would have positive impact and bring the price back up.

Beefed up prices recorded at Rockhampton bull sale
Australia's biggest bull sale has attracted record prices and a clearance rate of 98 per cent.
The sale at Rockhampton, in central Queensland, finished last night, with more than 1,000 bulls fetching nearly $6.5 million over three days.
The top sale of $90,000 was paid for both a grey and a red brahman bull.
John Croaker from the Australian Brahman Breeders Association says it is the result of years of work.
"They have certainly invested in the breeding herd and the genetics that they are using and it is certainly paying off," he said.

SA grain harvest begins early
The grain harvest has started two weeks early in South Australia this year because of the lack of spring rain.
Ian Mudge from Telowie, near Port Pirie, has reaped 300 hectares of peas and barley so far and says despite very low yields, the grain is of reasonable quality.
However, he says not all of his crops will be worth harvesting and expects to be finished well before Christmas.
"I reckon we'll have most of November and December off. I think it's just one of those years that we'll just chalk up to experience and forget about and zip back next year and have another go," he said.
On the far west coast of the Eyre Peninsula, the Thevenard silos has also reported its first delivery of oats.
Meanwhile, the estimated value of South Australia's crop production has been slashed to $600 million, about half of what it was last year.
The grim outlook has prompted ABB Grain to close at least two silos over summer.
And operations manager Peter Weaver says other silos throughout the state could be added to the list.

Rice growers promised record price to plant
Australian rice growers are being guaranteed a record price of $320 a tonne to plant a crop this year.
The author of a new book on ways to better manage water says all users should have to account for the way they use the resource.
John Pigram, a Professor of water policy at the University of New England in New South Wales, says farmers have already been forced to improve their efficiency to make the most of low commodity prices.
He is calling for a national audit system to force users to justify their water allocations.
"Whether that be for irrigation, for industry, for a wetland, or a brewery, [they have] ... to be accountable for its use," he said.

Bunnings at centre of grapevine quarantine concerns
Giant hardware chain Bunnings could face prosecution for allegedly bringing grapevines into South Australia from a phylloxera risk area in Victoria.
Phylloxera, aphid-type insects that attack and kill grapevines, are not present in SA.
The Department of Primary Industries says 122 grapevines were found in four Adelaide Bunnings stores.
Spokesman David Cartwright says any breach of quarantine conditions could put the state's $2 billion wine industry at risk.

Tough conditions may halve Barossa crop
South Australia's famous Barossa wine region could only harvest half its normal volume of grapes this vintage.
A major frost this week has damaged budding vines and comes on top of a lack of rain and reduced water entitlements.
Bob Taplin from the Barossa Winegrape Growers Association says while lower yields might help to reduce the industry's grape glut, it will not help growers because prices are set to stay low.

Reduced canola crop prediction may see oil seed imports
A forecast of the smallest canola crop in more than a decade has prompted speculation that local crushers will import oil seed from Canada.
Grain analyst Malcolm Bartholomaeus says there is likely to be a shortfall between Australian production and customer demand.
He says with canola $90 a tonne cheaper in Canada, crushers might look there to fill the gap.
"One of the considerations is plant utilisation, so importing the canola would be attractive from that perspective," he said.
"Also what's the value of the oil coming out and canola oil is reasonably highly priced at the moment, particularly with the underlying biodiesel demand - then you look at the demand and the price that might be achieved for the meal and at the moment there's certainly going to be domestic outlets for canola meal in Australia with the current feed situation out of this drought."

Number of rural financial counsellors to be cut
Rural financial counsellors say they will have to cut staff because the Federal Government's latest round of funding does not go far enough.
The Federal Government topped up funding for the scheme by $10 million in the last Budget and the new program kicked off this month.
But Louise McArthur from the National Association of Rural Counselling Services says a number of counsellors will be lost in every state because the money will only fill funding shortfalls.
"It was slashed hugely, but there's been no negotiation regarding that and I think this has been the big issue right across the country," she said.
"That from the regions and the states we've put in what we think was an applicable appropriate number of counsellors, but we haven't been able to fund that level of counsellors and with the climate change and conditions across Australia our demands are going to become greater not lesser."

Commercial fishermen finding it difficult to sell boats
The fishing industry is having trouble selling its commercial fishing boats, in the wake of a federal buyback of more than 400 licences around Australia.
In the major southern port of Eden in New South Wales a $2 million vessel is on the market for just $200,000.
Processor and boat owner Titch Rodahl has accepted a buyout package and has sold his boat at 1 per cent of its value.
With the buyout, it's not viable to stay open with the overheads and all that sort of stuff, it's not worth running the boats," he said.
