
Drought tightens grip in NSW
New drought figures have been released for New South Wales, painting a dire picture this winter.
After the lowest May rainfall in 50 years, 89 per cent of the state is now officially drought declared, up from 62 per cent the previous month.

Extending local content rules won't allay Nationals' fears
The chairman of the Federal Government's policy committee on communications says the National party's concerns about cross-media ownership plans would not be allayed by an offer to extend local content rules to regional radio.
Communications Minister Helen Coonan told the National Press Club she is considering forcing regional commercial stations to air a set amount of local production.
Nationals MP Paul Neville, who chaired an inquiry into regional radio, says his party will continue to push for more concessions on the controversial media changes.

Smut-infected cane to be destroyed
More sugar cane smut has been found on a south-eastern Queensland cane farm.
Authorities have confirmed that up to three hectares of smut-infected cane has been found on the already quarantined property near Childers.
With the industry biosecurity plan in full swing, decisions on how to destroy affected cane and whether local sugar mills will be allowed to crush have yet to be made.
Joe Russo, who discovered the disease on his family farm last week, says it is a hot spot of infection and crops will have to be destroyed.

Former wool industry leader backs marketing campaign
A test marketing campaign for wool in the United States is money well spent, according to a former industry leader.
Former senior executive of Wool International Bob Richardson has defended the joint venture with Saks of Fifth Avenue and retailer Dillards.
He says the initial investment of just $6 million will be recouped by growers several times.
Mr Richardson rejects the assertion made by consultant Graham Lean that money spent on promotion has no impact on wool prices.
"Absolutely I do. It is just so simplistic to think that just because there is not that correlation that therefore promotion of wool has not been successful in the past," he said.

Lack of rain blamed for reduction in grain export licences
The lack of winter rain in Western Australia has forced the state's Grain Licensing Authority (GLA) to reduce the number of special export licences it issues this season.
The GLA is responsible for granting special export licences for WA barley, lupins and canola, and has approved just four out of nine licences in the latest round of applications.
Chairman Wayne Obst says with the seeding window fast diminishing, seasonal conditions are too risky to hand out further licences at this stage.
"We looked at nine applications and five were deferred because of the season, some for canola and some for malt barley, because we feel at this stage it would be not appropriate to look at it, when the situation for canola is less than ordinary," he said.

NZ farmers encouraged to head to Tassie
Representatives of a Tasmanian council are in New Zealand at the moment trying to entice farmers to relocate from the land of the big white cloud to the Apple Isle.
The Circular Head Council is distributing a booklet at this week's New Zealand National Agricultural Field Days, giving a regional and economic profile of the northern Tasmanian region.
The council's strategic projects officer, Lisa Nelson, says compared to New Zealand, prime dairy land in Tasmania is almost half the price and any farmers who make the move will have no problem settling in.
"Tasmania's very similar to New Zealand in a lot of respects," she said.

Shorthorn bull sells for record Aust price
A new record has been set at the National Shorthorn Show in Dubbo in New South Wales, with a shorthorn bull selling for $75,000.
The bull was exhibited by the Calrossy and Cowper Schools at Tamworth, and bought by John Nitschke from Hahndorf in South Australia.
Auctioneer Mike Wilson thinks Nero 62K Zee Top, as he is called, may have even gone one better than setting a record Australian shorthorn price.
"I think it's a world record, I know there was a bull in Canada called Signature who made about $US37,000 and I think $75,000 yesterday is a world record price," he said.

Phantom cattle prompt audit of livestock ID system
The Federal Government has ordered an independent audit of Australia's national livestock identification system.
The system allows Meat and Livestock Australia to electronically trace cattle from birth to slaughter using ear and rumen tags, but it has been controversial since its inception 12 months ago.
The Agriculture Minister, Peter McGauran, says he has ordered the audit after criticism from the Australian Beef Association (ABA), which claims there are 11 million 'phantom' cattle on the database that do not exist.
But the minister has warned the ABA against tarnishing the beef industry's reputation.
"Such criticism can potentially harm the industry," he said.

Report at odds with Govt over options for Murray
A draft report by the Productivity Commission, designed to canvass options to re-invigorate the Murray River has found that engineering projects are unlikely to save enough water.
The study finds the best solution is for governments to buy back water for environmental flows.
But Federal Agriculture Minister, Peter McGauran, rejects the idea of governments buying water through licences, allocations or options.
Bernie Wonder, from the Productivity Commission, says science and engineering are not enough to address the shortfall in the Murray River of some 500 gigalitres.
"We do need to go a bit further in terms of finding the quantity of water that has been identified and if we look only to those infrastructure solutions and that is going to be a very expensive way to go," he said.

AWB execs quit
Two more executives have resigned from wheat exporter AWB.
Both men were closely connected to the company's oil for food dealings with Iraq.
Michael Long, currently head of international sales, was in charge of the Middle East desk at the wheat exporter during the oil for food program, and has given evidence to the Cole Inquiry about trading arrangements at that time.
AWB was embarrassed when photos of Mr Long and former chairman Trevor Flugge, appeared in the media showing the men carrying guns on a tour of Iraq.
Charles Stott, currently in charge of Landmark, also appeared at the inquiry and repeatedly denied any knowledge of kickback payments.

Budget not supportive of processors, says farmers association
Tasmanian farmers say last night's state Budget does not do enough to support processors.
Although it describes the Budget as farmer friendly, the Farmers and Graziers Association says processors need relief from payroll and land taxes.
Association executive officer Greg Bradfield says processors of dairy, meat and vegetables are farmers' first-end customers and deserve more support.
"It's very important that they're competitive because they're under a lot of competitive pressure from interstate and overseas so we want to make sure that the whole value chain is competitive so that farmers can get the most out of that value chain as possible," he said.

Minister plays down prospect of banana imports
Banana growers and the Federal Agriculture Minister have rejected media reports that Australians will be eating imported bananas within months.
While there have been calls for imports, because of the high price of bananas after Cyclone Larry destroyed the Queensland crop, the Government is standing by local growers.
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says an import risk asssessment is currently underway, but previous assessments have ruled out imports.
"We will not be in any way susceptible to the temptation to bring in bananas as a short-term risk," he said.
"We know the damage that that could cause to our industry, which would be even more devastating than Cyclone Larry's effects."

Cowra meatworks dispute settled
An industrial dispute at a meatworks in New South Wales, which gained national attention, has been settled.
The Cowra abattoir dismissed a number of employees, offering their jobs back at a much lower pay rates, under the new industrial relations laws.
Under political pressure, the company reinstated the employees under their previous award, while pay negotiations took place.
State Meatworkers Union secretary, Charlie Donzow, says while some workers will receive less money, the pay is much higher than the dismissed workers had been offered.
"The area where they won't gain as much is when the company goes into levels of production over and above the minimum they put in place now," he said.

More smut found in Qld cane
Yet more sugarcane smut has been found in south-east Queensland, forcing the Isis Mill to postpone the start of its crush.
The mill was due to start operating on Monday but yesterday, authorities told a growers' meeting that delaying the crush would give surveillance teams a better chance to determine how widespread the smut problem is.

Mulesing alternatives available from 2007: AWI
Two alternatives to mulesing will be available for farmers by 2007 and 2008 respectively, beating the 2010 deadline set between wool growers and animal rights group PETA.
Wool Research body Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) had its trials set back earlier this year when the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service rejected a key product, collagenase as a biosecurity threat.
But head of blowfly control at AWI, Jules Dorrian, says a new product, producing similar results, has received the all clear.

Retrenched Beaconsfield gold miners urged to head west
Retrenched miners from Tasmania's Beaconsfield gold mine are being lured to Western Australia with the promise of good jobs and a secure lifestyle.
Fifty-two workers were made redundant after the April rock fall that killed one miner and trapped two others.
Western Australian Mines Minister John Bowler says his government has set up a special migration service to assist miners wanting to relocate to the booming resources state.
"We've got heaps of jobs over here, wonderful lifestyle, great to raise your families," he said.
"We're just saying to those workers at Beaconsfield if you haven't got a job and you've got a young family and you want to start anew, Western Australia is a great place to be.

Crop growers desperate for rain
The need for rain across north-west Victoria's grainbelt is now desperate.
A run of severe frosts this week has depleted moisture levels further.
Department of Primary Industries agronomist Rob Sonogan says about 80 per cent of the Mallee's crops are sown and most have germinated.
But he says without rain since the May break, many have failed to develop secondary root systems.
"I've actually sighted a couple of situations, very small areas in paddocks where the crops have actually died," he said.

Snow causes problems for NZ farmers
This week's storms on New Zealand's South Island, which have dumped more than 60 centimetres of snow, have caused management problems for farmers.
Helicopters are delivering emergency supplies to those in more remote communities, including fodder for farm animals.
President of the Mid-Canterbury Federated Farmers Rupert Curd says power is out on the Canterbury Plains and electric fences on dairy farms are on the blink.

GM cotton row heats up
Debate over genetically-modified (GM) cotton in northern Australia is heating up, with two biotechnology companies applying to the Commonwealth regulator for licences.
The Office of the Gene Technology Regulator (OGTR) rejected a similar proposal four years ago, which means GM cotton cannot be grown commercially in the Australian tropics.
Environmental groups say any new GM cotton could become established as a tropical weed.
But Ord River farmer Rob Boshammer says it is unfair that the north is missing out on the new technology.
"I think it is a very dangerous situation where parts of the country can be allowed to use technology and other parts not," he said.
"It seems totally unfair to me if you live one side of the 26th parallel you can grow GM cotton, if you live a metre the other side of the 26th parallel you can't. It seems to put an economic impost on us."

Farmers views sought about saleyards sale
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) is seeking farmers views about the proposed sale of two Victorian saleyards.
The Victorian Livestock Exchange wants to buy yards at Korumburra and Sale but already owns many saleyards in the district.
The ACCC is investigating whether the acquisition will limit competition from other saleyard operators.
And some farmers fear it could lead to the closure of the Korumburra saleyards.

Rodeo nominations sky-rocket
Hundreds of spectators and competitors are expected to descend on the historic Top End town of Pine Creek tomorrow.
After a three year hiatus, the rodeo is back.
The town is also buzzing with the prospect of new gold and iron ore mines opening.
School teacher and rodeo competitor Mary-Ellen Willis says the popularity of the event is growing across the Northern Territory.
"Last year there was a low number of competitors. This year it's just sky-rocketing. We have over 130 nominations so far," she said.

World Cup rivalry breaks out at abattoir
World Cup fever has broken out at an abattoir in north Queensland.
The heckling has started at Mackay's Borthwicks abattoir as Monday morning's soccer game between Australia and Brazil draws nearer.
Borthwicks currently employs 72 Brazilian meat workers who are passionate football fans and the battle lines have been drawn.
"The Brazilians are very cocky, very confident, they think they're going to win easily, so we're giving it back to them," one of the workers said.
"A lot of them, they think things with Brazil will be the same as it was with Japan. It's going to be a hard match," said another.

Specific funding for regional health care proposed
Deputy Prime Minister Mark Vaile has proposed that Commonwealth funding for health care to the states be conditional on part of it being specifically allocated to regional areas.
Mr Vaile says the state of rural cancer and obstetrics services at the moment is unacceptable.
He says a change in the funding formula would force states and territories to spend more money on rural hospitals in their next funding agreements, starting in 2008.
"The Commonwealth Government has the responsibility to ensure that the taxpayers dollars that we are spending on behalf of the taxpayers of Australia are spent in the most equitable way," he said.

Ag Census expected to show increase in farm numbers
The country's biggest collection of agricultural information is expected to show an increase in the number of farms, despite the drought.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics is asking 190,000 primary producers for production figures and stock numbers for the 2006 Agricultural Census.
The last census, five years ago, identified 130,000 genuine farm businesses operating in Australia.
But the bureau's Allan Nicholls is expecting an extra 30,000 small farms to participate this time.
"They've certainly been there all along but they've been quite small and we haven't been able to pick them up through our normal channels," he said.

Elders seals deal to export beef cattle to Russia
A deal to ship Australian breeding beef cattle to Russia has been signed by pastoral company Elders.
The first shipment of 3,500 cattle is due to leave Australia in July from Portland in Victoria and Fremantle in Western Australia, eventually unloading in Vladivostok, so they can acclimatise before the Northern Hemisphere winter.
The plan is to then increase shipments until about 50,000 Australian cows a year are sent to Russia.

More sugar cane smut found in south-east Qld
Surveillance work over the weekend has uncovered more sugar cane smut in south-east Queensland.
The exotic fungal disease that stunts sugar cane has now been found on at least six more properties near Childers.
Unlike the first few identified hot spots, the latest properties to be confirmed quarantined and 'struck' by sugar cane smut are not from the same farms but they are within a few kilometres of the initial discoveries.
Surveillance work is being stepped up throughout the region and the Isis sugar mill has postponed the start of its crush until next week.
Nearby Bundaberg Sugar has put its harvesting on hold, just for the day, to enable its growers to meet and learn more about the disease.

Retrenched Beaconsfield miners yet to find jobs
Retrenched miners from the Beaconsfield Gold mine in Tasmania say job offers are not exactly pouring in.
Just last week the Western Australian Government was talking up opportunities to try to lure experienced underground operators from Beaconsfield.
But Jerry Kahmann says he has been applying for jobs since the Beaconsfield rock fall two months ago.
He says despite the $8 million Federal Government aid package, he and his mates have been left to their own devices to find new work and he has not yet been offered anything outside Tasmania.
"We're all hearing that there's a great big shortage of skilled miners on the mainland," he said.
"Maybe a position in Cobar, there's another position up in Cannington, Queensland, Bendigo.
"Got in four applications up in Olympic Dam with BHP Billiton themselves, also I've tried to get in with the contractors up there.

New import rules bring India into line with international standards
India's Government has agreed to new rules for wheat imports, as the country struggles to fill a multi-million tonne tender.
Only two companies, including Australia's AWB, put forward successful bids in the last round.
India is hoping its new requirements, which bring it in line with international standards, will attract more interest.

Farmers urged to get involved in carbon trading scheme debate
A report commissioned by the National Farmers Federation says farmers should push to have trees on their properties included in carbon trading schemes.
It says schemes being drawn up by states and territories are likely to have an impact on the cost of power used by farmers but this could be offset by selling carbon credits from farm forestry.
The report's author, Brett Janissen from the Allen Consulting Group, says with a New South Wales scheme already established, farmers need to get involved in the debate now.
"It's not completely clear at this point that the system that states are designing will actually countenance forest sinks," he said.
"It's very likely but my advice to the farmers is to throw their weight behind that to push that over the line.

Melbourne wool auction room lease good news for buyers
An offer by independent wool brokers to take up the lease of Melbourne's auction room has gained the support of buyers.
The Australian Wool Exchange announced last month it was giving up the lease of the Brooklyn wool selling centre.
Peter Morgan, from the Australian Council of Wool Exporters, says the interest of independent brokers is good news for buyers.
"We were quite worried at first but we're delighted that the independent brokers have been able to react as quickly as they have and in the manner that they have," he said.
"What it will mean that it ensures the ongoing of sales here which is the most convenient site for buyers because they've all got, nearly as I said, nearly all got offices here."

Mashes committee winds up
Landholders in the Macquarie Marshes of central western New South Wales have been forced to disband their local management committee because of ongoing drought and a lack of funding.
Scientists say the marsh is the largest nesting site in Australia for waterbirds like egrets, ibis and heron but over the last four years it has been so dry the birds have been unable to nest.
Sue Jones, from the now defunct management committee, says it is a struggle to survive.
"With drought and reduced flows in the river, landholders just cannot keep going," she said.
"They need to at the moment put their time and resources into their own enterprises just to keep themselves afloat.

Irrigators donate water to dying red gums
Irrigators in north-west Victoria have donated a record amount of water to save stressed and dying river red gums.
It is the second year the Mallee Catchment Management Authority (CMA) has coordinated the project.
This year 1.7 gigalitres of water has been donated, enabling seven sites along the Murray River to receive environmental flows.
CMA chief executive Jenny Collins says it is an amazing response considering the economic downturn facing local horticulture.
"They have really showed that they care about the environment by donating their water in this sort of fairly severe situation for them," she said.

Farmers may have to customise products
Farmers are being urged to sell the health benefits of their products if they want to get ahead in an increasingly competitive market.
A conference in Melbourne, looking at the future of food, has been told consumers will pay more for produce that offers added benefits like higher calcium or antioxidants.
Dairy researcher Peter Hobman says it is not unthinkable that farmers will have cows producing specific healthy types of milk.
"There is certainly the potential for individual dairy farms or collections of dairy farms to produce milk that is customised for an end use," he said.

US sugar quota changes mooted
The US sugar quota program has long been a source of frustration for Australian producers and exporters.
But changes may be in store.
With full implementation of the North American free tree agreement by 2008, US Agriculture Under-Secretary JB Penn says a flood of Mexican sugar could force changes.
"The border, being completely open in 2008, will mean that we will have to modify the program in some way  we can't continue to operate a supply-control program if you can't control the supply," he said.

Abrolhos Islands able to handle day tourists, says researcher
The beautiful Abrolhos Islands off the coast of Western Australia are said to be one of the country's best kept secrets.
They are dotted with bright beach shacks that rock lobster fishermen and their families live in for three months of fishing.
There has been increasing concern that the islands are a secret no longer and too many visitors are wrecking the biodiversity.
But after studying the problem, university PhD student Emily Stoddard says there is still a place for tourists.
"I think that the islands certainly could handle much more day visitation of the type where the air charter flights bring in people for the day, take them for a swim and a snorkel, have a picnic, go for a walk," she said.

Grim outlook for grain production
The continuing drought has worsened Australia's outlook for grain production.
The Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) has just downgraded its forecast for this season's crop yields, by 11 per cent, since its last forecast in February.
ABARE says the area being sown to wheat, barley and canola has also fallen 6 per cent.
But the bureau's John Hogan says while plantings are down in most states, the outlook is still better this winter than last.
"Last year we actually released our crop report a little bit earlier than this, and were a bit below what we're saying now," he said.

AWB in bid to stop inquiry accessing oil-for-food documents
Wheat exporter AWB is back in the Federal Court today, trying to stop the inquiry from using documents relating to the company's own investigation of the oil-for-food dealings.
AWB has asked the Federal Court to permanently block Commissioner Cole from accessing some 2,000 documents covered by legal professional privilege, including the company's own 18-month internal investigation into its part in the oil for food program.
Recent changes to the Royal Commissions Act now give Commissioner Cole the power to examine the documents, and decide if the privilege claim is valid.
Although the Federal Court is set to rule on the privilege status of the documents in July, today's action from AWB is to try to stop the Cole Inquiry accessing documents now.

Citrus canker report due out today
The Senate Rural Committee will table its report on central Queensland's citrus canker outbreak this afternoon.
The outbreak of the disease on Evergreen farm near Emerald led to the destruction of all citrus in the region - about 500,000 trees in all.

Demand keeps beef prices up
Global beef prices are tipped to remain solid, with strong demand for Australian beef and live cattle exports.
The US drought, and lacklustre US exports because of mad cow disease, should underpin this bouyant demand for several months, at least.
Steve Kay, the editor of US Cattle Buyers Weekly, says the American drought is slowing production, but the biggest single influence is still the inability of the US to export to Japan and Korea.

Wineries urged to dump excess wine
The country's peak wine grape grower organisation has called on wineries to dump excess wine to ease the current oversupply.
Mark Mckenzie, from Wine Grape Growers Australia, says wineries should help out growers by throwing out large volumes of old, poorer quality wine.
He says wineries should also consider mothballing their own vineyards and buying from individual growers instead.
"There are some wineries unfortunately who want to walk away from the issue and say it's not our problem, it's grower's problem. But they are still significant producers," he said.
"They are still part of a system and obviously they were very largely responsible for oversupply by giving very strong market signals over many years for growers to plant."
Meanwhile, the Australian table grape industry says it will continue its battle to try to export to China.
A delegation has spent the past fortnight meeting with quarantine officals and looking at the Chinese table grape market.
Australia has never had formal access to China but our fruit used to be sent via Hong Kong.
Australian Table Grape Association chief executive, Jeff Scott, says he will encourage the Federal Government to talk with Chinese Government officials.
"They are very concerned about some of Australia's pest and diseases in particular fruit fly but we've done a lot of work on fruit fly in the sense if we do cold disinfestation treatment it will kill all fruit fly," he said.

More wool processing goes offshore
The shipment of the Australian wool processing industry to Asia continues to gather pace.
Elders has announced it will start fitting out its new Chinese factory with equipment from its former Geelong plant in the next few weeks.
However, the company still has not made a decision on what it will do with equipment from its Parkes plant, in New South Wales.
Will McEwin, the general manager for Elders in China, says the former Geelong plant should be in full operation by early next year.
"It will be effectively what Geelong was, which was scouring as well as combing, right the way through to top and then we also have a link into the larger Nanchang group which is our partner in China and they go right the way through to suit making," he said.

Dairy farmers get animal welfare information kits
Dairy farmers around Australia are being sent kits in the mail, containing information about animal welfare practices.
The kit, from Australian Dairy Farmers Limited, aims to inform the wider community, rather than the farmers, about the industry's standards.
Wes Judd, from Australian Dairy Farmers, says it help dairy farmers stand up against critics in the community.
"We feel we have a huge resource in our producers around Australia and we want to give them the information," he said.

Banana prices has flow on effect
The high price of bananas has also pushed up the price of apples.
There is increased supermarket demand for apples after Cyclone Larry destroyed about 90 per cent Queensland banana crop.
Peter Darley, from Apple and Pear New South Wales, says prices are now the highest for several years, and in some places are up by 40 per cent on last year.
But he says there is also competition from mandarins.
"There is quite a steady demand for apples this year. Prices are reasonable. There is always going to be shelf space there as the bananas are quite expensive and they would be stocking very, very few bananas," he said.
"But I think also there is a preference to citrus as well. Children have got a preference for mandarins because they are easy to peel, whereas these days kids seem to want a sliced apple and that is very difficult to put in a lunchbox."

Insurance
Meanwhile, the banana industry wants to set up its own crop insurance scheme.
The industry on the east coast has not had any form of crop insurance for six years, after finance companies stopped offering it, due to weather risks.
The Australian Banana Growers Council says it has cost producers $60 million to get back on track after Cyclone Larry.
The council's Tony Heidrich says a cost-sharing insurance scheme between growers and the Federal Government would help.

Extention of ag census to small farms welcomed
The decision to include more of Australia's small farms in this year's agricultural census has been welcomed by authorities in coastal New South Wales.
Australian Bureau of Statistic's surveys are in the mail this week, including 30,000 to hobby farms that generate as little as $5,000 a year.
John Williams, from the New South Wales Primary Industries Department, says it will give the first truly accurate account of coastal farm production.

WA takes fight to 'cane toads with wings'
Western Australia is stepping up its fight against the destructive pest bird the starling.
The State Government has allocated an extra $2 million towards reducing starling populations in the state's south.
Agriculture Minister Kim Chance says starlings are every bit as unwelcome as the cane toads threatening the north of WA.
"I think cane toads with wings is a very apt description," he said.

Paper maker adds new zoo poo to roo poo
After having worldwide success with a paper made from kangaroo poo, a company in north-western Tasmania has signed up with Sydney's Taronga Zoo to make use of its elephant waste.
Creative Paper will make a range of stationary, for sale in the zoo's gift shop.
The company's Joanna Gair says the first elephant dung delivery was in a fine paper-making state by the time it arrived in the post.
"It had been in transit for just over a week so it was fairly ripe by the time that we'd received it," she said.

Senate committee changes criticised
The Federal Opposition says the Government's move to cut the number of Senate committees from 16 to 10 is partly designed to silence "maverick" rural MPs.
Labor and Greens senators say the Government wants to stop committees dealing with contentious rural issues like the AWB oil-for-food scandal, mismanagement at Australian Wool Innovation, citrus canker, the Snowy Hydro sale and Telstra services in the bush.
Liberal Senator Jeannie Ferris, from the Rural and Regional Affairs Committee, denies the changes will not stop scrutiny of rural issues.
"All those significant inquiries - AWB, AWI, any changes to the Wheat Marketing Act, the question of apples coming in from New Zealand - they have all been done by the Legislation Committee, which remains," she said.

No AWB bid for Indian wheat contract
Eight international companies are competing for the latest $2.2 million tonne tender of wheat to India, but Australia's AWB is not amongst them.
The wheat exporter is working through another two deals to India worth a million tonnes.
Canada and Europe are expected to be the main suppliers for the new tender.

Court ruling delays Cole inquiry findings
The Cole inquiry into wheat exporter AWB is now not expected to deliver its findings until September or October.
AWB's Federal Court action over privileged documents is the reason for the delay.
Although AWB lost its fight to keep the "apology" document confidential, it has kept fighting to keep some 2000 other documents from public scrutiny.
Earlier this month the wheat exporter launched legal action to get the Federal Court to decide the privilege status of the documents, including those of its own internal inquiry into oil-for-food dealings.
Yesterday's hearings in the Federal Court ruled AWB had the right to get the court to decide the legal status of the documents, because their case preceded the increased powers of Commissioner Cole.

China agrees iron ore price rise
China's steel mills have given into pressure to settle on a 19 per cent increase in iron ore price in negotiations with Australian producers.
Negotiations broke down in April, with China refusing to pay higher prices again, after hikes of more than 70 per cent last year.

Citrus canker report recommends AQIS changes
A Senate report into the Queensland citrus canker outbreak has recommended the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) respond to allegations of breaches of quarantine in fewer than three working days.
The five recommendations also included police training for some AQIS staff and an overhaul of the National Management Group for pest incursions.
The Senate rural and regional affairs committee found citrus canker had destroyed 500,000 trees around Emerald in Central Queensland, and cost the region $70 million.
Managing director of 2PH farms, John Pressler, lost more than 250,000 trees to canker, but says he is not surprised no-one was charged over the outbreak.
"It's really only subsequent to the Senate inquiry that the investigators actually revisited the whole scene," he said.
"By this time, a whole lot of evidence and information is missing, so it's not surprising, it's just another indictment against the way AQIS performed in this entire charade."
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says he will carefully consider the findings of the Senate report, and believes at least two of the recommendations make good sense.
He has defended AQIS against criticism that it was too slow to investigate reports of illegal imports of citrus budwood.
"I don't agree with the criticisms of AQIS. These investigations were conducted professionally and thoroughly," he said.

Mining bursaries offered to WA students
The Federal Government has established a $500 mining careers bursary, to encourage students to take up careers in the mining industry.
The cash is on offer to 30 year 10 students who choose to take on the challenging maths and science subjects that are pre-requisites for entry into mining courses at Western Australian universities.
Eric Lindsay, from Curtin University's school of mines, says he hopes the students will eventually help ease Western Australia's labour shortage.

Meat industry concerned over skilled worker visa delay
The Australian Meat Industry Council will meet the Federal Immigration and Agriculture ministers this week to try to sort out problems with the skilled workers visa program.
Currently, the Immigration Department is not processing applications for skilled workers under the 457 visa program because of concerns some employers are breeching the visa conditions.
Australian Meat Industry Council chief executive, Kevin Cottrell, says delays in processing visa applications for overseas meat workers are creating a nightmare for the industry.

Endangered cockatoo could scuttle pulp mill
Developers of a proposed $650 million pulp mill at Penola in South Australia fear six dead trees will scuttle their project.
The river red gums are potential breeding sites for the endangered red-tailed black cockatoo.
The Federal Department of Environment and Heritage has declared the project will have a significant impact on the bird, and referred the matter to the Minister, Ian Campbell, for a final decision.
Project manager John Roche says his Protavia company is very disappointed with the decision.

Qld Uniting Church leader speaks out against proposed dam
A religious leader has spoken out against a proposed dam on south-east Queensland's Mary River.
Up to 900 properties along the Mary River will be flooded, forcing many farmers and home-owners off their land.
The Queensland Government says drilling has found bedrock, meaning the site is suitable for a dam.
The Moderator of the Uniting Church in Queensland, Dr David Pittman, says the local community was not consulted before the project was announced.
"The people in the Mary Valley at the present time are experiencing a mix of dismay, of shock, of confusion and of anger," he said.

Blue mussel farm set to become Australia's largest
Within five years, South Australia's Wallaroo Blue mussel farm will be the largest in the country.
The business is spending $4.5 million developing its 200 hectare lease in the Spencer Gulf.
New Zealand company Flinders Seafood aims to supply 2,000 tonnes a year of blue mussels to the fresh seafood market.
Company director Bruce Koller says a major part of the expansion will be marketing mussels to Australian consumers.
"In New Zealand we eat about two and a quarter kilograms of mussels per head per year and in Australia it's about one tenth of that," he said.

Mango industry to target young families
Research has revealed mango lovers are an ageing population, with more than 60 per cent of consumers aged over 40.
The expanding mango industry plans to step up its campaign to target young families, particularly in the cooler southern climates.
Trevor Dunmore from the Australian Mango Industry Association says young people need to be taught how to eat mangoes easily.
"Young people are often busy like all of us and often don't have time and want something quick and fast, and that's why you see fast food restaurants become so popular," he said.
"Traditionally mangoes have been seen as messy to eat, something you had to actually cut and prepare and it takes time.

Garden club members take up fruit fly fight
Gardeners near Victoria's Goulburn Valley region are taking up the fight against Queensland fruit fly.
Recent outbreaks in southern New South Wales and Shepparton in Victoria have spurred the Garden Club at Howlong, on the Murray River, into coordinating baiting programs, and disposing of rotten fruit.
Howlong Garden Club members say they are extremely disappointed with this year's crop.
"We had a nectarine tree this year that was just beautiful and I thought I'll get in before these little buggers and I'll pick them a bit earlier," one member said.
"I picked them all, took them inside and cut one and it was just full of maggots, it was just terrible."

Anti-mulesing campaigners protest at soccer World Cup
Animal rights protesters have taken their campaign against mulesing Australian sheep to the soccer World Cup in Germany.

Vegie exports drop
Vegetable exports dropped $30 million in the last ten months, as Asian markets overlooked fresh Australian produce in favour of cheaper goods.
At the same time, imports of fresh and frozen vegies increased by 6 per cent, particularly frozen potatoes from the Netherlands and Belgium.
Chief economist at Ausveg, Ian James, says the big threat to Australian exports is from China.
"The Chinese threat is more one in terms of them competing with Australia in traditional Asian markets, rather than Chinese imports, if you like, coming into Australia," he said.

Volunteers pitch in to help out bushfire-affected farmers
A massive working bee is under way in southern New South Wales to help farmers burnt out on New Year's Day.
The bushfire blackened 25,000 hectares of farming country near Junee.
People from all walks of life have pitched in to repair the damage.
The fire destroyed 1,500 kilometres of fencing and six months on much of that still needs to be replaced.
There has been no substantial rain and for many farmers hand feeding livestock is the priority.
So armed with gloves, pliers and wire-strainers, more than 100 volunteers are lending a hand.

WA Govt looks to Europe to toughen illegal fishing laws
The Western Australian Government has looked to leads from Europe for tough new laws on illegal fishing.
Fisheries Minister Jon Ford says those caught in state waters will now face fines of up to $150,000 and longer jail sentences.
The changes also give state fisheries officers new powers to seize suspected illegal vessels, even if they do not have an actual catch on board.
Mr Ford says international fishing laws do not have enough clout.
"I sent my officers over to Europe to talk to the OECD authorities that deal with illegal fishing," he said.
"They told us it was very difficult to get a conviction under international law, it was unlikely that it would change in the near future. Our best chance was to strengthen our laws at a domestic level."

Frost hits SA winter potato crop
The price of potatoes could be set to rise after a large area of the winter crop was wiped out in South Australia's Mallee region.
Growers estimate about 10,000 tonnes of potatoes have been affected by frost and they are expecting stocks to be in short supply later in the year.
Pinnaroo grower Rick Rossitano lost about 4,000 tonnes.
"It's very widespread. It's affected all the spud farmers in the area," he said.

Dairy farmers warned to prepare for drop in income
There is a warning for dairy farmers today to prepare for a drop in income, as milk processing companies announce new season prices.
Fonterra has announced a 5 per cent drop in opening price compared to last season, blaming the downturn on a weaker international market and fluctuating Aussie dollar.
Industry analyst Steve Spencer believes other processors will follow suit.
"There's a lot of competition for milk in the industry and that's a pressure that's keeping prices reasonably firm," he said.

Police won't investigate mulesing complaints
The New South Wales Police Force has poured cold on water on claims that farmers could face animal cruelty charges if they mules sheep without pain relief.
Animal Liberation has warned that from July 1, they will ask police to investigate anyone carrying out a mulesing operation without analgesia, saying that would contravene animal cruelty legislation.
But NSW Assistant Police Commissioner Steve Bradshaw says police will not be visiting farms, as mulesing is legal.

ABARE urged to lower wheat yield estimates
A grains industry analyst says the latest forecasts for Australia's crop yields this year are too optimistic.
The Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) has revised its harvest estimates down by 11 per cent since February but says the outlook is still quite positive.
But the editor of the Callum Downs Commodity News, Malcolm Bartholomeus, says ABARE should lower its wheat yield estimate of 22.8 million tonnes.
"If we don't get some rain right around the country very soon they will have to start factoring in some quite substantial production shortfalls from the estimate that they have published at this stage," he said.

Joyce not budging on biofuels bill
Nationals Senator Barnaby Joyce says he will vote against the Federal Government to force changes to a fuel tax bill, which could see farmers get fewer rebates on biodiesel.
He says the bill, being debated today, only allows farmers to get a diesel fuel rebate from major oil companies, and not small biodiesel producers.

N Korea nuclear concerns push up gold price
The price of gold was up $12 in New York overnight after a spate of safety-net buying by international investors concerned about North Korea's nuclear ambitions.
Gold Corporation analyst Brom Suchecki says safe-haven buying is also rapidly increasing in Australia, as a protection against nervy equities and booming real estate markets.
Mr Suchecki says gold buying at the Perth Mint is up 300 per cent in the past year.
"A lot of it is what you would call your mum and dad investors. I think that institutional demand is probably a factor overseas, probably not so much in Australia," he said.

Tas mine fire halts production
An overnight fire has stopped production at an iron ore mine in a remote area of north-east Tasmania.
The fire at the Savage River mine is believed to have started in an ore concentrator while workers were welding.
More than 40 firefighters battled the blaze, and Australian Bulk Minerals managing director, Dave Sandy, says the damage is still being assessed.
"Most of the damage is related to conveyor belts and electrical cabling, there may be some structural damage on the upper levels but on the main floor it seems to be in reasonably good shape," he said.

Truss comments spark rail infrastructure stoush
A war of words has broken out about whether the rail freight industry is pulling its weight when it comes to funding infrastructure around the country.
Federal Transport Minister, Warren Truss, said rail should do more to make itself competitive and win back its share of the market from road freight.
The Productivity Commission is investigating whether road and rail freight industries are competing on a level playing field.
Brian Nye from the Australasian Railways Association says the industry is working hard to improve its position.
"Rail has been neglected and the Commonwealth Government has put quite a lot of money into it, but overall it's doing a lot to improve itself and it could do more," he said.

US could target Aust pork market, researcher says
The re-entry of the US into the Japanese beef market could see American producers try to sell more pork to Australia.
The chief executive of the Pork Cooperative Research Council, Dr Roger Campbell, said the beef ban saw the Japanese switch to US pork.
"So what they did get was pick up [in]... exports, record exports actually, in pork, so they are likely to come back and so they'll be looking for other outlets for them and Australia is one of those outlets," he said.

US cattlemen unhappy with Japanese beef trade terms
The US beef industry is not impressed by Japan's agreement to re-open its market to US beef after Tokyo completes inspections of US plants in July.
Trade adviser for the National Cattlemen's Beef Association, Greg Doud, complains it has been two-and-a-half years and the US has traded no beef with Japan.
Now on the eve of a visit to the US by Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi, Japan has agreed to resume imports, but keep out the vast majority of US beef with what Mr Doud says is an unscientific barrier to trade.
"We're not going to be happy until we're at an international guideline, and we're able to trade everything, at a minimum, under 30 months of age," he said.
Japan insists on a 20-month standard to combat mad cow disease.
The US cattlemen back trade sanctions against Japan, introduced by several US lawmakers, until Japan finally lifts its US beef ban.
The Cattle Council of Australia is cautiously welcoming the news.
Executive director David Innal says the sooner consumer confidence about the safety of beef returns, the better for all cattle producers.
"We welcome the US beef coming back into the market," he said.
"Since BSE was detected total consumption of beef is down about 15 per cent and what we are about is seeing that total pie growing of beef consumption.

New 'Team Dogging' event to feature in rodeo
This weekend's annual rodeo in the small far north Queensland town of Laura features a new event called 'Team Dogging'.
Organisers believe it is the first rodeo in Australia to have a bull-dogging competition with two horsemen leaping off to grab a bullock - one by the head, the other by the tail.
Laura rodeo secretary Karlene Shephard says the event evolved last year when the truckload of normal dogging steers did not turn up, so they used larger bullocks instead.
"[The] fellas went through and drafted off the ones that had a little bit of horn that was there and put them in the dogging box," she said.
"When the first fella went in he looked at it and he said 'gee they're a bit big' because they were bullocks and they were flat out fitting in the dogging box and anyway another fella off the committee said 'why don't two of you have a go at it'.

Salvos to maintain refuge staffing levels
The Australian Services Union says the Salvation Army has agreed to maintain staffing levels at its Newcastle refuge for the time being, while negotiations continue over planned staff cuts.
The Salvos want to restructure Faith Cottage, a crisis accommodation centre for women and children, so permanent staff would be employed on a part-time basis.
A night-shift position will also be cut.
The union's Kylie Rooke says management of the centre has agreed to negotiate its position.
"The Salvation Army have responded to our offer of working cooperatively together by saying they are willing to continue discussions and they will maintain the status quo at the service in regards to it being staffed 24 hours and the hours that the staff work," she said.

Fuel tax Bill expected to negatively impact on biofuels industry
A fuel tax Bill which passed through the Senate last night is expected to have a negative effect on the biofuels industry in Australia by removing tax advantages for smaller biofuels producers.
Last year the Federal Government commissioned a report into the viability of the industry, including research from the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE).
ABARE'S study says the world oil price, feed grain prices and tax arrangements all affect the industry.
The report's author, Graham Love, says any changes to taxation are significant.
"They could have a significant effect to the extent that if tax treatment became more generous then you would presume that that would make the industry more viable or if they were to go the other way it would be less viable," he said.
The Senate was also told the Bill could severely disadvantage rural communities who are looking to the biofuels industry for investment.
Gary Tepper, from Swan Hill Council in Victoria, says the whole community is working hard to make sure a local ethanol plant goes ahead.
"We really see the whole biofuels, renewable energy industry as some sort of hope for regions," he said.

Bad roads costing states: report
A new report claims low road and transport investment is costing some states up to 12 per cent in livestock exports.
The Australian Livestock Transporters Association is debating the report on bad roads at its national conference this weekend in Canberra.
While fuel prices continue to plague the industry, the association's executive director, Luke Fraser, says gains can be also made in other areas.
"There's a limit to what the industry and perhaps even the Australian Government can do with world fuel prices, which has forced us to look more closely at things like targeted road investment," he said.

Farmers, service station owners not expecting inquiry to lower petrol prices
The National Farmers Federation and fuel station owners are not expecting another Senate inquiry into fuel will lower prices.
Senator Nick Minchin has announced the new inquiry after pressure from the Federal Opposition.
While there is scepticism about what the Government says is the 45th parliamentary probe into petrol pricing, Ron Bowden from the Service Stations Association says it is always a useful exercise.
"There's always value to an inquiry because the market never stays still," Mr Bowden said.

Fishing cops to be based in Darwin
The policing of illegal fishing in Australian waters is being centralised in Darwin.
It is part of the Federal Government's budget allocation of $389 million over the next three years.
Fifty-three people will be based at the new Territory head office of the Australian Fisheries Management Authority.
The authority's Peter Venslovas says nearly 190 illegal boats have been apprehended so far this year.
"And our target rate for the coming year will be about 650 vessels," he said.
"Last calender year 281 illegal foreign fishing vessels were apprehended. Most of those, or nearly all of those were from Indonesia.

Use of brown coal could reduce greenhouse emissions, study shows
A research project into the use of brown or dirty coal could reduce Australia's greenhouse emissions from power generation to close to zero in the next decade.
The Monash Energy and Anglo Coal project in Victoria is exploring the feasibility of drying, gasifying and then liquefying coal into a new synthetic low emission fuel.
With 80 per cent of Australia's power generation coming from coal, Jeff Cochrane from Monash Energy says there will be important benefits for the environment

Strategy tackles vegie supply plan for remote communities
Aboriginal communities should get better supplies of fresh fruit and vegetables, following the remote Indigenous stores conference held in Adelaide this week.
Community leaders, store managers and freight companies, from three states and the Northern Territory, collaborated to work out better ways to improve delivery of perishable goods.
Many neighbouring communities have been using different trucking companies and in far north WA, Bililuna store manager Tom Waller says hopefully they can now get their vegies more than once a fortnight.

Organic beef producers feeling drought
Organic cattle producers in the outback channel country of Queensland and South Australia are finding it hard to meet demand because of the continuing drought.
OBE Beef, which supplies grass-fed organic beef to the United States, Europe and Asia, is finding it tough as dry conditions keep cattle numbers low.
Sharon Oldfield from Cowarie Station on the Birdsville Track, who supplies organic beef, says they have had to halve their cattle herd.
"We wouldn't have had a good general summer rain probably for four or five years now, in some areas it's been up to six years," she said.

Wool trade features in award-winning novel
A former wool grower and shearer's cook has won Australia's richest literary prize.
Roger McDonald was last night awarded the Miles Franklin award for his novel about the origins of Australia's wool trade, The Ballad of Desmond Kale.

NT aerial medial team celebrates milestone
There is another medical team celebrating 60 years in the air.
The Top End Aerial Medical Service averages six flights a day, caring for those living north of Elliott in the Northern Territory, and also serves offshore oil rigs and parts of South-East Asia.
Flight nurse Marg Fuller has been on board for half of the service's history, and has one particularly happy memory.

Europe poised to act on foreign wine threat
Europe is admitting it has to do something about the threat from foreign wines produced in Australia, South Africa and Chile.
The European Commission has unveiled plans to pull out more than 10 per cent of Europe's vines over the next five years to reduce its wine glut.
The move, which will cost of 2.4 billion euros, is an admission that Europe is worried about the threat from foreign wine producers like Australia, South Africa and Chile.
The EU also admits it has made mistakes in the areas of marketing and subsidies.
The commission's Michael Mann says it is a radical overhaul to address a massive wine lake.
"We are going to get rid of a situation where we have got too much wine. We are going to use money to get people out," he said.
"We are going to simplify our labelling rules and you know after a five-year period once all is said and done with the re-structuring it will be the market that decides. We want to be in the situation where the European wines are the ones people are choosing."

Wheat trade with Iraq to continue: Howard
Wheat Australia, which is yet to ship 350,000 tonnes of wheat to Iraq, is watching events in the Middle East closely, after the Iraqi Trade Minister threatened to stop all deals between the two countries.
Abdul Falah al-Sudany threatened to cut trade ties after the shooting of a bodyguard from his ministry by Australian soldiers earlier this week.
But following diplomatic talks overnight, Prime Minister John Howard has told Channel Nine he does not expect Australia's wheat trade to be affected.
"I can tell you that the Iraqi Trade Minister saw the Australian ambassador and the Iraqi Trade Minister told our ambassador that he did not want this incident to interfere with the bilateral relationship or to affect our trade relationship," he said.
Meanwhile, the Western Australian Farmers Federation denies it is withdrawing support for AWB's wheat export monopoly.
Federation senior vice-president, Robert Doney, yesterday suggested in a national newspaper interview that the veto power should be removed from AWB's single desk.
But grains president Ray Marshall has described the comments as a "naive indiscretion", and denies any split on the issue.
"Always when you have 17 people sitting around a table you will have differing opinions," he said.
"I believe at this moment whilst policy is very clear, we're at the status quo until such time that the Cole Inquiry comes out and we're very clear about our views.
Meanwhile, Australia is not alone in suffering wheat crop losses this year from drought.
The US crop continues to decline in quality, as well as quantity, amid persistent heat and drought.
The US wheat crop is already forecast off 14 per cent from the last marketing year, and dry conditions are also taking a toll on the quality of what's left.
Brad Rippey is a US Agriculture Department meteorologist and says the winter wheat crop is rated 29 per cent which is good to excellent.
"But a very large 46 per cent is very poor to poor," he said.

Minister pushes deal with Gulf states
Although talks to set up a free trade deal with the United Arab Emirates have stalled, Trade Minister Mark Vaile says Australia should try to do a deal with all six nations of the Gulf Co-operation Council.
A spokesperson for the Minister says the Gulf states are an important and growing market for Australia, with exports of goods worth $4 billion in 2005.
The Gulf Council comprises the UAE, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar and Saudi Arabia.

Commodity exports' earnings booming
Earnings from commodity exports are booming even more than expected this year, largely thanks to the minerals and energy sector, according to the latest figures.
Australia's Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) predicts commodity exports will rise 16 per cent this year, more than double its original forecast issued at the Outlook Conference in February.
The increase is thanks to a strong minerals and energy sector which is now expected to earn $48 billion - up $4 billion on the February forecast.
It is a different story for farm commodities though with the February forecast of $29.6 billion downgraded slightly.

NLIS program chief defends rollout
The head of the committee in charge of implementing the National Livestock Identification System (NLIS) has defended the time it is taking to roll it out.
That is despite just one state so far - Victoria - having mandatory NLIS without any exemptions.
The NLIS is a national program designed to allow all cattle to be traced from paddock to plate.
The chairman of the national NLIS executive committee, John Wilde, says the rollout has exceeded expectations.
"We are well into the implementation phase and it's performing really well, it's exceeding our expectations. It will obviously be a number of years before the implementation phase is finally washed through. But we are very very pleased with the progress to date," he said.
Meanwhile, Linda Hewitt, the chairwoman of the Australian Beef Association, which is lobbying against the NLIS, says cattlemen were better off without the scheme.

Tas fox population confirmed: report
A new report has found there are definitely foxes in Tasmania and they pose a multi-million dollar threat to the State's agricultural sector.
Despite a number of reported sightings since a state task force was set up three years ago, the existence of foxes in Tasmania has remained an open question.
But main author of the new report, Glenn Saunders, says there is no doubt that a small population exists.
"I guess we came in as an external group and looked at it impartially," he said.
"We had nothing to gain or benefit from concluding one way or the other, but on reviewing all of the available evidence that we could gather, and I mean all of the available evidence not just snippets of it here and there, we really couldn't come to any other conclusion."
And if they find the Tassie foxes, there is a market for them.
A fox skin buyer and exporter says demand and prices for Australian fox skins are rising after years of disinterest from the trade.
The trade declined and prices plummeted during the 1980s during a bitter campaign waged by animal liberation groups against the use of fur in fashion.
A large number of fox shooters stopped taking skins and the skill of skinning, and preparing the pelts, almost died out.
But fox skin exporter Don McGilvray says renewed Chinese interest in fur is leading the trade's recovery.
"I'm paying from $25 for the tops and the averages are anywhere from 13 to $16," he said.

Fishing industries set for restructure
Fishing industries in four regions across Australia look set for major change as a result of a Federal Government buy-back.
The $220 million scheme closed last week and unofficial reports from industry sources suggest that up to half the fishermen in some areas have accepted the Government's offer.
In New South Wales, the South-East Trawl Fishing Industry Association president, Fritz Drenkharn, says eight out of 14 boats have put in tenders and if they are all accepted it will have a big impact on processing plants.
"Oh well, restructuring on the shore facilities, the haulage contractors will also be sitting on the fence waiting to see what's happening in relation to their business, Mr Drenkharn said.
"In the on-shore facilities there's a real lot riding on the line."
Meanwhile, there should be more prawns for Christmas this year, with news that 660,000 baby tiger prawns have survived a cold spell in the far north of Western Australia.
The Kimberley Prawn Company was concerned their post-larval stock had died a fortnight ago, when water temperatures dropped in the tank.
Owner Ian Crimp says it now proves the region is suitable to harvest throughout the year.
"[It] now means that we have the ability of cropping all year round at Derby, whereas parts of Australia they can only crop prawns during the summertime," Mr Crimp said.

Grain farmers' future looks bleak
Many Victorian grain farmers are still very depressed about the outlook for the season.
In western Victoria, the local water authority, Grampians Wimmera Mallee Water, says the winter channel run may even have to be cancelled for rural home dams because they are only 6 per cent full, the lowest level ever recorded for this time of year.
Grain and sheep farmer Bernard Gross from Drung Drung says if winter rainfall does not return to normal, the future will be bleak.
"My family have been here since 1873. But I have been told that the early 1900s were also particularly dry," Mr Gross said.

Frost-tolerant crops a possibility: scientists
Scientists believe grain growers could one day be able to sow frost-tolerant cereal crops.
The Australian Centre for Plant Functional Genomics in Adelaide is studying the genes of Japanese barley, which has frost-tolerant properties.
Frost damage is believed to cost South Australia's and Victoria's barley industries more than $30 million per year.
Professor Geoff Fincher says this research could eventually have applications for other crops.

Dried mangoes head to E Timor orphanages
Children in orphanages across the capital of East Timor will be chewing on Northern Territory 'mango leathers' this month.
Kakadu Dried Fruits, based at Batchelor, has donated 500 packets of dried mango.
Owner Doug Allsopp says he has more to offer as food aid, if the first batch is well received.
"We had an excess of this product [and] because our product doesn't contain any preservatives or additives, it doesn't have an indefinite shelf life," he said.
"Rather than allow the product to go to waste we thought that people in East Timor could probably put it to good use.

Swimmers avoid crocs in lake record attempt
Six Sydneysiders swam into the record books over the weekend, crossing Australia's largest man made lake in Western Australia's Kimberley region.
Their efforts crossing Lake Argyle raised $80,000 for the Royal Flying Doctor Service.
Swimmer Jon Attwater, from Balmoral, says it took them 19 hours over three days and thankfully they did not spot a crocodile through their goggles.
"We didn't have any face-to-face confrontations which we were very glad of, Mr Attwater said.
"We do a lot of ocean swimming and we swim around in the sea with probably a lot more sharks than we're ever likely to see crocodiles here, but we were very concerned about meeting up with a crocodile, we've only seen pictures of them in movies and they don't look very nice."

Harnessing up the horse and cart increases in popularity
As the price of fuel rises, many people are turning to alternative modes of transport.
They are dusting off their bicycles, putting on the sneakers, but what about harnessing up the horse and cart?
A group of carriage drivers in Tasmania gets together once a month and it seems interest in their hobby is on the rise.
Driver Wally McGlone says some members of the group have been braving the traffic and taking to the bitumen.
"We've got one man here and he's driven his horse down to what they call the railway supermarket at Ulverstone and got his groceries, but I don't think his wife was game enough to go with him but he went down anyhow," Mr McGlone said.

Council continues fight for skilled worker visas
The meat processing sector says it has not given up fighting for more skilled worker visas to be processed, despite failing to get a commitment from the Federal Government.
Abattoirs across Australia employ hundreds of foreign workers under the 457 visa program to address labour shortages, but over the past four months the Immigration Department has delayed some applications.
The Australian Meat Industry Council will continue meetings with the Federal Government this week.
The council's Kevin Cottrill says talks so far have addressed allegations that industry is misusing the program:
"There are a lot of allegations and a lot of them are not specifically related to the meat industry, and I think this is one of the difficulties we have at the moment," he said.
"Our discussions with the department generally have been around issues of skill levels that are required. There have been some discussions about pay levels but these issues are really now covered by pay regulations."

AWB finalises deal with India
Wheat exporter AWB has finalised two deals to India, worth 1 million tonnes, after many months of negotiations.
The first shipment was held up after claims of contamination by Indian authorities which were later disproved by further testing.
The second deal, though reached in principle some time ago, has only now been finalised.
AWB spokesman Peter McBride says the wheat will be shipped as soon as possible, but farmers will bear the cost of the delays.

Forecast brings more heartache to farmers
There is another gloomy weather forecast for farmers who had been hoping for rain.
The latest climate forecast shows that the vast majority of Australia is likely to receive less than average rainfall over the next three months, with the driest outlook of all in the grainbelt of Western Australia.
And in another blow to grain growers, temperatures are likely to be above average, particularly in New South Wales and southern Queensland.
Dr Andrew Watkins, from the National Climate Centre, says warm sea temperatures in the Pacific are to blame.

NFF announces meeting to resolve quarantine differences
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says there is a lack of confidence in Australia's quarantine system and it has set up a meeting on July 14 to try resolve differences between farmers and government.
The NFF says farmers and industry have a number of concerns with the way Australia's quarantine system is working and say that communication between authorities, and the farm sector, has broken down.
The July meeting will bring together industry and the Federal Government to try and sort out the problems, including what the NFF calls a "loss of confidence" in quarantine and biosecurity.
But Kevin Cooper, from the NSW Department of Primary Industries, denies the system is in trouble.
"Experiences in recent years has shown that the communication has been robust and sound," he said.

Milk processor explores merger option
One of Australia's largest milk processors has opened the door to a possible merger.
Victorian-based Tatura Milk, which provides about 5 per cent of Australia's dairy products, is undertaking a financial review after posting a $6 million loss before tax last year.
Chairman Ian Bertram says all opportunities will be explored during the six-month review.
"We haven't ruled out any possibilities, we've left it very open, we don't know the outcome, we don't know the answer," he said.

Sheep farmer helps out cyclone victims
A Victorian sheep farmer has started a charity drive to help Queensland banana growers whose crops were devastated by cyclone Larry.

Federation dismisses survey perceptions
Most consumers think the chicken industry is using hormones and steroids to make their birds artificially large, according to a survey which the industry funded.
The Australia Chicken Meat Federation says the perceptions revealed in its survey are untrue.
Executive director Dr Andreas Dubs says antibiotics are used to keep birds healthy, but it is good breeding and not additives that has caused the increase in size.
"They were essentially thinking primarily of hormones and antibiotics, that's what came up," Dr Dubs said.

Frost wipes out crops in WA
Horticulturalists in Western Australia are suffering an unseasonal frost, wiping out a number of fruit and vegetable producers in the state's south east.
The estimated $4 million worth of damage will cause shortages and price rises.
Manjimup avocado producer Tony Fontiani says it is his second successive year of seasonal setbacks.
"We've lost about approximately 90 per cent of our fruit we had 12,000 trays of avocados on the trees and I think we'll be lucky if we pick a thousand to 1,500 trays," he said.
"It just means that we will have to tighten our belts and spend less and struggle through for another year but we're only just getting in to the situation where we're producing a quantity of avocados, this was going to be our big year."
And frost could cut Australia's navel orange crop this season by 20 per cent, according to preliminary forecasts.

SAFF rejoins National Farmers Federation
South Australia's Farmers Federation (SAFF) is rejoining the national farming body.
SAFF withdrew its membership from the National Farmers Federation (NFF) three years ago because it could not afford the fees.
The NFF has negotiated a discounted rate to South Australia for the next two years.
SAFF's Carol Vincent says her organisation could not continue being independent from the national body.
"I don't think it was affordable for the SAFF any more not to be a be a member of the NFF. Farming organisations can't afford for the future to be in competition with one another they have to be working together, we think the future needs strong national representation as well as strong state representation," she said.
NFF chief executive Ben Fargher says the move will strengthen farmers' influence in Canberra.
"To be frank it does hurt NFF's credibility if state farm organisations are not members, so it is great that SAFF is coming back," he said.

