
Grains Council awaits AWB restructure details
Four days after news of a major restructure at wheat exporter AWB, the nation's peak grains body says it still needs more detail before it can comment.
AWB has announced the separation of its export and corporate arms, to improve transparency.
The Grains Council says it will continue to support the current system, and will not endorse any restructure proposals until the "oil for food" inquiry is over.
Chairman Murray Jones has rejected suggestions the council is responding too slowly.
"All AWB has given us is the press release and so we really haven't got any further detail," he said.
"They've spoken themselves about giving further detail over the period of time.

Qld unveils $1bn Toowoomba-Gladstone rail link
The Queensland Government has committed a billion dollars to complete a railway link between Toowoomba and the expanding central port of Gladstone.
Premier Peter Beattie says the 200 kilometres of rail will solve a "missing link" in the state's rail system.
It will mainly be used to transport billions of tonnes of coal from the Stuart Basin to port, but Everald Compton from the Australian Inland Expressway Project says grain growers will also benefit.
"Twenty million tonnes of coal a year will go out on the line but in addition it will mean that all the grain crops, the cotton and beef and all types of products can also use the port of Gladstone, which they are unable to do now," he said.

Wool growers seek speedy industry body merger
A rebel group of wool growers says a proposed merger between the industry's two peak bodies must be completed before producers are asked to vote to increase levies later this year.
Late last week, Australian Wool Innovation and Australian Wool Services signed a deal to look at the legal and financial implications of integration.
Martin Oppenheimer from the Australian Wool Growers Association has welcomed the move, and says it needs to happen quickly.
"The issue that we have now, moving forward, we've got Woolpoll 2006 coming up this December that will decide how much wool tax that wool growers will be spending for the next three years," he said.
"We need to know what the strategic plan is of the new merged entity.
"We can't be voting on a level of wool tax for the next three years if we don't know what the company will look like or what its goals will be."
In New South Wales, growers from the Goulburn-Yass branch of the Superfine Wool Growers Association voted unanimously to support the agreement at a meeting on Friday night.
Chairman John Ive says the merger talks have been dragging on for too long.
"With this sort of stand-off position between the two bodies, it wasn't giving good vibes to wool growers," he said.

Irrigators push for bore water sales to Toowoomba
Irrigators on Queensland's Darling Downs say they will push ahead with a plan to sell water to the Toowoomba City Council, after residents overwhelmingly voted against using recycled water.
At a referendum on Saturday, 62 per cent of Toowoomba residents said they were not prepared to use treated waste water to alleviate shortages.
John McVeigh, from lobby group NuWater, says irrigators can sell 5,000 megalitres of bore water to the city each year.
"Irrigators in our part of the world have put on the table a concept of urban rural water trade, now that's a concept that is getting support from CSIRO and is certainly something that has been practised in Israel and California," he said.

Shellfish disease spreads off Vic coast
Abalone divers and fisheries officers have been unable to stop the spread of a herpes-like disease, which is killing shellfish off the coast of south-west Victoria.
A 10 kilometre no diving and fishing zone was implemented off Port Fairy last month, but ganglioneuritis is now killing abalone a kilometre outside the boundary.
Mark Gervis, from South Ocean Mariculture, says as well as affecting wild stocks, the disease has hit on-shore abalone fish farms hard.

Online grain exchange nears launch
A consortium of agriculture and finance industry experts says it is almost ready to launch an Internet trading system for grain, oil seeds and legumes.
Wheat is the only commodity to be restricted to trade only in Australia.
Con Galtos from the Australian Grain Exchange is in negotiations with the major grain handling companies to talk up the benefits.
He says the system will give growers access to every price being offered in the international market place.
"The growers will know that the prices that they are offered for their grain are the prices that are offered for everybody else's grain, in other words it creates a level playing field," he said.

Wheat belt communities tackle achohol-related deaths
Communities in WA's wheat belt are trying to halt the growing number of alcohol-related deaths in the region.
The Wheatbelt Public Health Unit will work with the police to make drinking venues safer by training bar staff to stop serving customers when they have had enough.
Spokeswoman Julia Dick says most people would be shocked at just how many people are killed by alcohol each year.
"Probably about 15 deaths a year in the wheat belt are attributable to alcohol. There's about a further 2000 people hospitalised each year because of excessive alcohol use," she said.
"It comes at a financial cost of about $5.5 million, which is an enormous amount of money.

Tax review hits agribusiness shares
Nervous investors have wiped up to 25 per cent off the value of a number of companies involved in agribusiness managed investment schemes.
Companies including Great Southern, Timbercorp and Wilmott Forests have been hit in recent weeks.
Investment analyst Steve Johnson says some of the uncertainty is being caused by a federal review of the tax incentives offered for the schemes, which include timber, grapes, almonds and olives.
"Most other businesses certainly aren't as volatile as this, it would be a 25 per cent fall, I would say, in the last 3 weeks," he said.

US blamed for trade talks impasse
US President George W Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair say they will make a final effort to save stalled global trade talks after a weekend meeting at the White House.
The Doha talks are at standstill after major trading powers failed to reach agreement on reforms to international farm trade.
The European Commission's Ambassador to Australia, Bruno Julian, says Europe had offered to cut tariffs on imports from 80 per cent to 50 per cent, and blames the US for the impasse.
He says it is up to the US to cut its $26 billion in domestic subsidies to farmers.

Money needs to be spent on ports upgrade, inquiry chief says
The head of a federal inquiry into port, rail and road infrastructure says most of the nation's significant ports need upgrades worth around $80 million each.
Nationals Member for Hinkler in Queensland Paul Neville says money will need to be spent to protect Australian exports of minerals, grain, timber and mineral sands.
He says transport networks in general are having trouble keeping up with the needs of the export sector.
"We have found that at nearly every port there is a need for some sort of improvement to the connectivity between the main road and rail freight truck routes and the ports themselves," he said.
"Now it varies from port to port and at one it might be a new rail connection, in another one it might be a ring road around the port and another the widening of the channels into the ports.
"We feel they could probably do it a bit better."

PM's news an 'enormous relief' in rural Aust
There has been a largely warm response to Prime Minister John Howard's decision to stay on and fight the next federal election.
Mr Howard announced yesterday that he would not be handing over the top job to Treasurer Peter Costello.
Mark Patterson, from Currie Communications, expects country Australia to be happy with the move, which should increase the chances of another Coalition victory.

Benetton wool deal collapses
A major deal to double Australian wool sales to Italian fashion giant Benetton has collapsed.
The $1.6 million deal to step up sales to 4 million kilograms a year was only announced two weeks ago and would have made Benetton one of Australia's biggest wool retailers.
Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) will not go into detail, but says since the announcement issues have come up which can not be resolved by either company.
Chief executive Len Stephens is urging others not to use the collapse as an excuse to destabilise the wool industry.

Herbicide used to poison crops, police say
Police in north Queensland have confirmed that the common herbicide glyphosate was used to poison up to 40 hectares of fruit and vegetable crops near Bowen.
A special Queensland Government task force has been set up in the region, to find out how the poison, which is commonly known as Roundup, got into the system in the first place.
One million dollars damage has been caused to the crops and police now suspect a water source associated with crop spraying was contaminated.
Detective Inspector Warren Webber says the contamination is being treated as an act of sabotage.
"We obviously have look specifically in relation to which farms etc were being sprayed and that sort of thing," he said.

1080 poison not under threat in animal welfare strategy
Humane control methods will have to be used in the battle against pest animals, under the new Australian animal welfare strategy.
The strategy, to be finalised by the end of the year, will emphasise the need for ongoing training and accreditation in pest control, whether it be for wild dogs or cane toads.
But Tony English from the Wild Animal Working Group says the widely used toxin 1080 is not under threat at this stage.
"Not in the short term - 1080 at the moment is still too valuable a toxin for us for use in say wild dogs and foxes, that there's no suggestion at all that we would be looking to phase out 1080," he said.
"We can start to look for new toxins and that's happening but there is some research being done to incorporate analgesic drugs, pain killing drugs with the 1080 to make it perhaps more humane than it currently is.

Goats theft to hurt students
The head of an agricultural college in western Queensland says the theft of up to 300 boer goats will have a major impact on breeding and teaching programs.
Ten pure bred bucks, 90 does and up to 200 kids valued at $13,000 were stolen from the property, Manningham, near Longreach.
Peter Scott from the Australian Agricultural College Corporation says the theft will hurt students.
"Thirteen thousand dollars is a significant commercial loss for us because all our pastoral operations must support themselves, but you know 90 does out of our breeding herd that's a significant loss," he said.
"We're probably trying to develop a really good commercial meat goat flock so that we've got a good model for teaching and demonstration purposes."

New food labelling laws cover Internet shopping: FSANZ
Food Standards Australia and New Zealand (FSANZ) says Internet grocery sales are covered by new country of origin labelling laws.
Horticulturists had raised concerns that the labelling laws introduced in June had failed to include the rapidly growing online market.
At the time, the nation's food regulator said it would call for industry input to fix the problem.

Debris causing problems for scallop fishers
Scallop fishers have hit a snag while harvesting reopened scallop beds off the east coast of Tasmania.
Debris from a failed fishing venture in the 1980s is causing problems for operators, with dredges becoming tangled in abandoned nets and lines.
It has been 20 years since the scallop beds near Triabunna have been open for fishing and John Hammond from the Scallop Association of Tasmania says it is a mess.
"The rubbish that's coming up is quite extraordinary really," he said.
"Plastics and monofilament shark nets and that type of thing that was stuffed inside these plastic bags to catch the spat at the bottom's sort of eaten out of the bag, the actual bag that the plastics were stuffed into.

Elders Rural Bank profit up 10pc
Elders Rural Bank has announced a $30.7 million profit for the past financial year, up 10 per cent on the previous year.
The bank is attributing its success to its focus on the rural sector, claiming country Australia is being ignored by the big banks.

Milk shortage forces processors to increase prices
Milk shortages caused by dry conditions in Western Australia have forced processors to increase their farm gate milk prices.
The New Zealand-based parent company of Peters and Brownes, Fonterra, has announced a one cent per litre step up for spring.
But Tony Pratico from the WA Farmers Federation says prices need to be substantially raised now.
"I think the processors have to start reviewing it now because the milk's price has to move forward or else on one of the processors here in Western Australia will find themselves without milk," he said.

Wimmera economy hard hit by drought
The lingering effects of the drought and ongoing tough seasonal conditions in Victoria's grain growing Wimmera region are still hitting the region's economy.
The Wimmera Development Association says businesses are feeling the flow-on effects of losing $568 million in grain-related income into the region in 2004.
Chief executive director Phillip Sabien says the situation has not improved for many rural towns.

One in 12 year event behind weather pattern, says forecaster
A one in 12 year weather event is creating an unusually wet winter in the north of Australia but dry conditions in the south, according to a Queensland forecaster.
Dr Roger Stone says the sub-tropical ridge has dropped below the Australian continent to the south of Tasmania this year.
He says it is an important cyclical event which might explain this winter's conditions.
"It's the second most important factor after the El Nino SOI system," he said.
"As people may have noticed it's been way south, it gives us a lot of easterlies or south easterlies on to the Queensland coast , but also tends to bring in a bit more moisture than might normally be the case.
"It tends to get a bit too wet up around Cairns in this type of year, but it can help the situation in central Queensland.

AWB lowers estimated pool returns
Wheat exporter AWB has lowered its estimated pool returns for the coming harvest by $4 a tonne for all wheat grades except durham.
The company says prices have been affected by fluctuating world prices, due to a better forecast for the spring crop in North America.

Rural sector 'can cope' with rate rise
A rural lender says the interest rate rise, announced by the Reserve Bank today, will not cause panic among farmers.
Neil Dobbin, the head of rural banking for Rabobank Australia, says many farmers have already fixed their loan rates and can absorb the rise.
But he says those who have recently acquired a new property or increased their borrowings may feel the pinch.
He also says a dollar at 76 cents US does not help export income.
Mr Dobbin says the main cost concerns farmers have are rising fuel and fertiliser bills.
"I think the rural sector can cope with this rise," he said.
"Seasonal conditions at this stage are generally pretty good, a lot of the commodity prices are in sound position.

Trade policy expert talks up possibility of Japan FTA
An expert on trade policy says the prospects for a lucrative free trade agreement (FTA) between Australia and Japan have never been better.
Foreign Minister Alexander Downer discussed a possible FTA with the Japanese Prime Minister in Tokyo yesterday and both countries are completing a feasibility study.
Dr Ann Capling from Melbourne University is studying the potential benefits of such an agreement, which was flatly rejected by the Japanese Government in 2002.
Japan is already Australia's most important trading partner, but quotas and high tariffs continue to restrict exports of beef, dairy, pork, grains, oilseeds, and fruit, and vegetables.
Dr Capling says there is increasing pressure on Japan to allow more of these supplies in.

US confident of maintaining Iraq wheat market
Iraq is now America's fourth largest wheat customer and the United States sees continued strong purchases in a market once firmly in Australia's court.
Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns was in Baghdad for farm co-operation meetings with Iraqi officials this week.
And despite an expected strong Iraqi wheat harvest this year, Mr Johanns is confident Iraq will continue as a solid US customer.
"We now have about 72 per cent of the market share. To translate that into numbers, that's about 2.3 tonnes in the 05-06 market year," he said.

Online trading opens market to more investors: trader
Day one of online trading at the Chicago Board of Trade has closed, representing a new era for the world's largest commodity trader.
The Board of Trade website says the introduction of electronic trading of agricultural futures contracts is part of its global expansion plans.
Australian trader Corrie Mcgrath says pit traders tend to operate for themselves, while trading online opens up the market to a whole new body of investors.
"Opening up to electronic markets means that a small person can come in through a broker and trade online themselves," she said.

Graincorp to keep some grain receival sites open
Graincorp has agreed not to axe 23 of the 108 grain receival sites earmarked for closure as part of its business rationalisation plan in the eastern states.
Following the announcement of silo closures earlier this year, Graincorp agreed to further negotiation with silo committees, who vowed to fight to keep their local silos open.
The company has confirmed they will keep seven of the 23 sites open for a year in Victoria and three in central Queensland.
It is not yet known what other sites across New South Wales will remain open and how much the move will cost the company.
Graincorp is expected to release further details tomorrow.
In Victoria, the Wimmera has been the most persuasive, saving four of eight sites earmarked for closure.
Ron Jackson, from Patchewollock in the Mallee region, says it is only a 12 month reprieve.

Fox find may prove costly
There is irrefutable proof that foxes are alive and thriving in Tasmania after the discovery of a still warm carcass by a farmer in the Northern Midlands yesterday.
It is believed the animal had recently been hit by a car.
Tasmania has been considered fox free and the pest could cost the state economy $8 million a year if it gets a foothold.
Wildlife biologist Nick Mooney says the fox, a young adult male, was likely to have been born in Tasmania.
He says it is the evidence that will finally silence the sceptics.
"We've had proof for years we believe," he said.
"This is just a most unfortunate and other piece of evidence, so I would have loved to have not seen anything ever again.

Nursery industry loses billions in sales
Queensland's biggest plant-based rural industry is having, by its own admission, its worst year in two decades.
The nursery industry had been worth about half a billion dollars in sales to domestic and export markets a year.
But a drought in the south of the state has cut production and meant a 40 per cent drop in sales to gardeners.
In the north, Cairns nursery operator Daryl Madder says some owners are finding the damage to their stock from cyclone Larry is worse than first thought.
"What we didn't realise at the time was the stock was blown over," he said.

Remote families seek boost in allowances
Families of remote secondary students in the Northern Territory are calling for a higher interstate boarding and travel allowance.
The Federal Government already provides boarding allowances for all isolated children, worth about $7,000 a year.
But Tina McFarlane, from Stylo Station near Mataranka, says the Territory Government should provide extra funds to send isolated children interstate.
She has even considered leasing the station to move the family closer to secondary schooling in Queensland.
"I have a daughter going into secondary school and she has close family in Toowoomba," Ms McFarlane said.
"There are boarding schools in the NT, but it's nearly quicker to go interstate than to Alice and where there is family.

Producers stop culling sheep
Thanks to some much needed rain in Western Australia, producers in Northampton in the state's wheatbelt region have now stopped culling their sheep.
In the northern agricultural regions, around 13,000 lambs and ewes have been destroyed and another 15,000 have died, because the season has been too hard.
Craig Walker from Elders says it is a relief that producers can stop culling, now that there is some green pick around.
"People didn't make that decision light-heartedly," he said.

Egg producers to be audited
Victorian egg producers are stepping up their quality assurance campaign, with a new system to ensure consumers get the egg products they pay for.
Egg farmers producing under the HenCare label will be audited to ensure they meet free-range farming, animal welfare and biosecurity standards.
The president of the Victorian Farmers Federation egg group, Meg Parkinson, says the campaign is designed to eliminate suspicion that egg products are often sold under false labels.
"There has always been a push by some people to say that egg farmers don't do things very well and the eggs in the carton are not the ones they say on the label," she said.

Chlorine used to eradicate exotic marine pest
An exotic marine pest has been eradicated, once again, from boats moored off Darwin Harbour.
The black striped mussel was found on three illegal fishing boats, apprehended in Australian waters.
Peter Zeroni, from the Northern Territory Fisheries Department, says chlorine was used to kill the mussels, but monitoring will continue.
"The vessels were treated in open water by a contractor with AFMA," he said.
"The chlorine we used to treat the vessels obviously affected the mussels. The chlorine will have gone into the woodwork and is likely to kill anything else that's in there.
"So we are pretty confident those boats are safe now. However as a precautionary measure, they will be re-dived every month, any vessels of hulls that are moored in the harbour will be re-dived on an ongoing basis.

Company seeks new growers to help meet demand
A major Victorian company hopes to produce an extra million kilograms of fresh snow peas each year by recruiting new growers in south-east Queensland.
The company, Select Produce, says it has been lured by water security and the favourable climate in the Bundaberg/Childers salad bowl.
The business supplies the two major supermarket chains, with most of its produce coming from Victoria.
But Queensland manager Lyle Wyatt says the company is recruiting growers in the Wide Bay area to help it meet demand all year round.

CDMA network replacement on track: Telstra
Telstra has rejected suggestions the rollout of its new mobile phone network in rural Australia is facing major technical difficulties.
Reports today claim trials of the billion dollar 3G network show the technology is not up to scratch and will not be able to provide the same quality and range as the current CDMA network.
Warwick Ponder from Telstra denies the claims, saying the program is still on track to replace CDMA by 2008.
"We still stand by what we've said all along about this network," he said.
"Today's story in the Australian Financial Review is a bit like speculating about the performance of a racing car before the wheels have even been fitted.

More men call depression hotline
A national hotline to help men in rural areas cope with depression has received 500 calls in its first month.
Chairman of beyondblue Jeff Kennett says 40 per cent of callers have been men, up from just 5 per cent.
Mr Kennett says being able to receive help anonymously from even the most remote areas seems to be making a difference.
"Unfortunately, depression is very prevalent throughout rural Australia and particularly among young men," he said.
"So what we hope with this beyondblue information line is to give men the capacity, wherever and however isolated their environment may be, for the price of a local call to seek direction and help as to what to do in overcoming their depressive illness."

Senate committee examines petrol collusion claims
Widespread rumours of collusion or price fixing between petrol companies will be examined by a Senate committee in Canberra today.
Chairman of the Senate Economics Committee George Brandis says the inquiry will investigate issues that may contribute to high petrol and diesel prices.
Senator Brandis says the main focus will be trying to uncover the truth about collusion.
"What we want to address, in particular, is the relationship between the oil majors and I am not saying that there are any anti-competitive practices, but there has been suggestion of that going back many years," he said.
"But I think the point to be made is that this suggestion has been about for years but it has never been proved.
"The ACCC has examined the matter and it has never found the existence of anti-competitive conduct."
The committee will also look at the financial viability of ethanol and whether fuel taxes should be reduced.

Project aims to boost zinc production at Mt Isa mine
Resources company Xstrata has announced a $160 million project to turn its Mount Isa zinc mine into one of the world's largest.
Fred White, general manager for zinc metallurgical processing, says production will rise from 5 million tonnes a year to 8 million by the second half of 2008.
He says the project also means more jobs for the region.
"We're looking at, for the duration of the project, having up to 200 extra people working in the concentrator providing construction engineering and contracting services, so it's a good story for the area," he said. 

Hunters dismiss fox fight call
A call from the Tasmanian Government for community help to hunt down foxes has been dismissed as a public relations stunt by professional hunters.
With the discovery of a dead fox in the northern midlands a few days ago, the Government wants a task force of more than 100 people to track down the pest.
But Peter Dark from the Field and Game Association says it is an old idea that did not work first time around.
"It's all very well to say 'we'll get a hundred hunters'," he said.

Graincorp to upgrade infrastructure
Eastern states' grain handler Graincorp will spend $25 million on a major upgrade before this harvest.
Most of the money will be spent on better infrastructure at silos, along with appointing grains services managers at the 77 biggest receival sites.

Taiwan market remains closed to cherry growers
Cherry growers locked out of their $7 million market to Taiwan will not be allowed back in this year.
Most mainland regions were banned from exporting fruit in January because growers could not prove their cherries were free of the Queensland fruit fly.
David Minnis from the Cherry Industry Advisory Committee says trials to treat fruit for fruit fly will not finish until January next year.
"It seems a long time away I know, but we've got to wait till the next season to do the full verification trial, then the evidence is written up in a format that we will then submit to the Taiwanese officials," he said.

Draft seed import regulations worry growers
Cut flower growers in northern Australia are renewing their calls for more time to comment on draft changes to seed import regulations.
Biosecurity Australia is reviewing the regulations, which Darwin grower Jan Hintze says will impact on flower breeding.
She says they will also make it harder to conserve species like ginger, which is under threat from timber harvesting across Asia.
"I think it's a significant role that Australia should play within its sphere of interest," she said.
"I mean these people that live in countries in South-East Asia and Asia, they are really concerned about the loss of this material too, but they can't save it all on their own.

Frosty mornings take their toll on wildflower industry
The wildflower industry in Western Australia is the latest sector to be affected by the dry season.
But it is not a lack of rain hampering production.
Frosty mornings are damaging the buds and Rhonda Tonkin of Coomberdale says it is the worst she has seen in 30 years.
Ms Tonkin says she will probably lose some export markets this year.
"If you don't have enough product for the customers they tend to just cancel the container and go to India or somewhere else," she said.
"But we are fairly unique in Australia with our dried flowers and the people are understanding because they know that we have a problem.

Company to streamline Australian operation
Further rationalisation is occurring across the international wine industry.
One of the world's largest international beverage alcohol producers, Constellation Brands, says it will streamline its Australian operation.
Constellation owns the South Australian-based Hardys Wine Company and plans to buyout some grape supply and processing contracts, and sell non-strategic assets.

More innovation needed to overcome wine glut: expert
The marketing sector has been forced to use its imagination to try to shift some of the billion litres of wine in storage across Australia.
One of the latest ideas is a six pack of cleanskin wines in brightly coloured bottles, which have stoppers, so they can be reused as water bottles.
Professor of wine marketing Larry Lockshin, from the University of South Australia, says there needs to be more innovation.
"Right now when you say to somebody 'wine', we think 750 millilitres in a glass bottle with a stopper of some sort, in Australia it might have a screw cap, other places might have a cork or a synthetic," he said.
"But that's a very traditional package, it's been around for hundreds of years, so we haven't been all that creative.
"Look at how you buy milk, how you buy fruit juice, how you buy even tomato paste in the stores. We used to buy it in cans, now you can buy it in tubes like toothpaste.

AWB announces new chief
The head of Orica Mining Services has been named the new managing director of wheat exporter AWB.
Gordon Davis, 50, will replace Andrew Lindberg, who quit at the height of the oil-for-food inquiry earlier this year.
Mr Davis will be paid $875,000 a year, which is less than Mr Lindberg was receiving.
AWB chairman Brendan Stewart says Mr Davis's role will be to stabilise the company and restore its credibility in the aftermath of the Cole inquiry.
"I'm very conscious of the fact that Gordon should not be in any way, shape or form deemed to have been involved in anything that's gone before us at AWB," he said.
"He is new to the organisation, he is a cleanskin in that sense and we look very much forward to him running the business as it goes forward, and essentially the board, and myself, will be dealing with any issues that come out of the Cole inquiry."
Mr Davis will start his role in mid-September.
Meanwhile the Grains Council has written to federal politicians looking for a guarantee that wheat growers will not be lumped with the costs of the Cole inquiry.
AWB estimates the royal commission into alleged kickbacks to Iraq will cost the company between $18 million and $20 million.
The council says current and future profits from wheat sales should not be used to meet the debt.

Coalition MPs pressure Govt over fuel prices
The push is on to find a way to reduce fuel prices with backbenchers pressuring the Federal Government to intervene.
Coalition MPs will meet in Canberra on Monday to put forward ideas to ease the fuel price pain, including more help for the ethanol and biofuels industry, excise cuts and tax concessions for rural and remote areas.
Federal Industry Minister Ian Macfarlane has previously been opposed to extending help to the biofuels sector, but now says it will be considered if it leads to cheaper fuel costs.
"The Federal Government is already providing some assistance to particularly the biofuels industry to get cheaper fuel onto the market and we are disappointed to date that part of that assistance is not actually reaching the motorists, so we'll continue to look at options there," he said.
"I guess Monday's partyroom offers us the opportunity to hear what the backbenchers are suggesting and to consider some further options."
In the United States, the peak body for corn growers in the mid-west believes biofuel production has brought life back to dying farming communities.
Almost 60 million tonnes of grain is processed each year in the United States to make biofuels.
Bruce Stockman from the Minnesota Corngrowers Association says ethanol has delivered a big boost.
"Everyone of the communities that built one of these ethanol plants has come back to life," he said.
"They were on the decline and they have vitality now.
"The dollars that the state gave as an incentive for the first 15,000 gallons of production has paid the state back 16-fold.

Farmers confidence falls
Farmer confidence has fallen due to lower demand, rising costs and poor seasonal conditions between April and June.
The latest agribusiness survey by the National Australia Bank says beef, dairy, wheat, sugar and cotton farmers are less positive about the future.
There is more optimism though for the wool and wine industries.
Analyst Skye Dixon says the good news is that recent rainfall has boosted the price outlook for the next year.
"Over the last 12 months, 2005-06 we saw rural commodity prices rise by around 4 per cent," Ms Dixon said.
"This is largely in line with a steep rise in beef and sugar prices," she said.

Mining companies continue posting profits
Evidence of the resources boom continues to show-up on the financial markets, with record profits posted by Australian miners in the past 48 hours.
The biggest result came from Rio Tinto, which has posted a profit of just under $5 billion for the half year.
Rio produces iron ore, coal, diamonds, copper, alumina and uranium in mining operations around the country.
London resource expert Kevin Tomlinson says the success of Australia's resources sector, despite high labour and operational costs, has surprised world financial markets.

Significant diamond find prompts mining hopes
Diamond mining in South Australia's Flinders Ranges is a step closer after the discovery of 30 diamonds.
Resources company Flinders Diamonds has been exploring the region for the past five years, but this is its most significant find.
Managing director Dr Kevin Wills says other results are yet to be studied, but so far the news is good.
"Each of these samples we're treating has got the chance of being an economic sample," he said.
"Soon as we get to that stage, then we'll convert to doing a feasibility study rather than an exploration program and that's what we trying to find.

Falling wheat crop to blame for AWB share drop
A Western Australian business analyst says AWB's recent share price has been affected more by the falling wheat crop than its new managing director.
The wheat exporter announced yesterday that Orica's head of mining Gordon Davis will replace Andrew Lindberg next month.
Shares in AWB slowly dropped during this week's trade, but gained two cents this morning to hover around $3.74.
Ashley Kelly from Bell Potter Securities says at this time of year the market sharply watches announcements about the grain pool.
"The last update we had on the grain pool was back on the 31st of July, which wasn't very long ago and of course those estimates were lowered," Mr Kelley said.
"If you're a betting person, then you'd probably bet there's possibly another one to come.

Analyst says wool market performing well
Elders says the wool market has performed well against the rising Australian dollar in the first sales after a three-week recess.
The eastern market indicator fell five cents to 741 cents a kilogram this week, with 47,000 bales of wool on offer in Sydney and Fremantle.
In Western Australia the indicator fell by 11 cents to 716 cents a kilogram.
Wool analyst David Fogg says it is surprising there was not a bigger fall, given the two cent rise in the Australian dollar.
"We really thought, particularly at the fine end, that we were going to see at least 20 and perhaps 30 come off prices, but what we saw in fact with the fine wools was 10 to 15 on the first day," Mr Fogg said.

Nine arrested after orchard raids
Fruit orchards in Victoria's Goulburn Valley were searched by police yesterday, resulting in the arrest of nine people on allegations of extortion, arson, drug offences and organised crime.
Charges are expected to be laid today.
Nine orchards were raided yesterday at the culmination of a 12-month undercover police investigation.
Inspector Gerry Ryan says the case relates to standover tactics being used by some fruit growers.

Assistance scheme extended for cyclone-affected growers
The Federal Government will extend a scheme to help north Queensland farmers whose crops were wiped out by cyclone Larry earlier this year.
Employers who qualify receive $200 per worker each week to help them keep staff and skills in the region during the tough recovery period.
Growers were hoping the scheme would run for 36 weeks but at this stage it will be limited to 26.
Denis Rigato's banana and avocado farms were badly damaged by the cyclone and he says any extra assistance is welcome.
"Any sort of help we get is much needed - it's going to help with our existing labour force," Mr Rigato said.
"Even though we've cut back it allows us to keep them [employees] going on, you know more time down the track.

Citrus growers ask for frost assistance
Riverland citrus growers who have had crops decimated by frost have asked the Federal Government for exceptional circumstances assistance.
More than 30 per cent of the region's navel orange crop was ruined during a long spell of frosty weather, with temperatures falling to minus seven degrees.
Peter Walker from the South Australian Citrus Industry Development Board says he has approached Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran with the proposal.
'We effectively have said when we have one crop failure that is a significant and he said it had to be prolonged failure so we're arguing that point of view at the moment," Mr Walker said.

Poppy growers asked to boost production
Tasmanian poppy growers have been asked at the last minute if they can plant an extra 2,000 hectares of poppies.
Pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline announced in April it would cut contracts by 90 per cent because of a world oversupply, but it has now secured a long-term deal that will clear out its reserve stocks.
Spokesman Mike Doyle says the company's relationship with growers may have been damaged, but he hopes they will come to the party.
"The timing's unfortunate I admit," Mr Doyle said.
"We certainly would have liked to have known at a different time of the year, but these sorts of negotiations are very involved and complicated and we are in a position now at least to see if there's ground out there available."

Tomato growers set to profit under new quarantine deal
Australian tomato growers exporting to New Zealand expect cost cuts and increased profits under a new quarantine deal.
The existing inspection regime has been relaxed under an agreement between Biosecurity Australia, the Quarantine Inspection Service and New Zealand authorities.
Exports across the Tasman are worth more than $5 million each year.
Andrew Phillip from Bundaberg-based SP Exports says the new quarantine regulations take effect immediately.

Federal Govt offers $1m to fight foxes
The Federal Government has offered more than a million dollars to fight foxes in Tasmania, as long as the Tasmanian State Government reinstates funding to a fox task force.

Leeuwin II changes young lives in NT
Forty young people from across the Northern Territory now have a career on the high seas in mind after a week at sea.
The group has been aboard Australia's biggest sail training ship, the Leeuwin II.
For 14-year-old Riley Vaughan of Wave Hill Station south-west of Katherine, it was the chance of a life-time.
"How hard it was to work a little sailing ship, I thought I had it tied down, it'd be pretty easy but it wasn't good enough," Riley said.
"I reckon the coils, the knots were the hardest, unfurling the sails, you have to climb up and and crawl out on the end of the sail and unroll it, but it was worth it.
"Everyone once in their life should have a ride on the Leeuwin."

Vaile denies EU claims of bias
The Federal Government has been accused of bias by the European Union by favouring the United States in negotiations for world farm trade reform.
EU trade commissioner Peter Mandelson has also snubbed Australia's invitation to attend trade talks in Cairns next month, calling on the Government to stop criticising Europe's farm policy.
But Australian Trade Minister Mark Vaile has flatly denied any allegations of bias.
"Well we have always been very ambitious as far as market access on agriculture is concerned and I reject the notion that we are biased towards the United States," he said.
"In fact we are the only country of the six in the G6 that put compromise proposals on all fronts, on market access, on cuts to domestic support and on changes as far as non agricultural market access is concerned.

Farmers want Govt rethink on fuel tax
Farmers who are developing commercial biofuel plants are hoping the Federal Government will rethink its policy on taxing alternative fuels after a meeting of Coalition MPs this afternoon.
Public concern over the high cost of petrol and diesel is expected to be a major issue at the gathering, although Prime Minister John Howard has ruled out cutting the federal fuel excise or subsidies for rural motorists.
Stephen Hobbs from Kaniva in western Victoria says it is time the Government helped the rural community to reduce its dependence on big oil companies.
"I think it's just a really disappointing position that the Federal Government has taken with the whole renewable fuel industry, when you consider that the fossil industry has had 100 years to get it's legislative framework in place," he said.

Calls for former AWB lawyer to be cross-examined
AWB's former in-house lawyer Jim Cooper is likely to give evidence to the Federal Court tomorrow, as the Cole Inquiry seeks access to 1,300 documents that may be relevant to the oil-for-food investigation.
Barristers for the Commonwealth have told AWB they want to cross-examine Mr Cooper, who resigned in April.

South Australian wheat bound for Iraq
Another consignment of wheat bound for Iraq will leave Port Giles in South Australia on Wednesday.
Part of the 350,000 tonne Wheat Australia deal, it is the first wheat from South Australia to leave the port for Iraq in almost two years.
ABB Limited's Maggie Dowling says the 23,000 tonne shipment is big news for the state's wheat industry.

Poor season affects lupin numbers
Western Australian lupin growers are worried that poor seasonal conditions will cut this season's production by two-thirds.
Farmers need to grow enough lupins each year to fill long standing overseas contracts, hold enough over to plant the following year and supply the domestic livestock industry.
With lupins fetching $300 a tonne to meet strong feed demand in the west, Alan Meldrum from Pulse Australia fears there will now be a lack of seed to plant next season.
"It's obviously a very ordinary season, there's not much production going to be happening from lupins in 2006 and the biggest concern is the great northern area where a lot of lupins are produced on an annual basis," he said.

Bid to increase cherry research, development industry fails
Just one vote has defeated a bid by the cherry industry to increase its research and development industry.
Ian Hay from Australian Cherry Growers says the levy rise would have helped to open up export markets in China and Taiwan, by funding a fruit fly program.
He says the industry is now working on an alternative proposal to put to producers.
"It exists now at one cent per kilo, however the conference voted unanimously at executive level to go out in the ballot again, but this time at four cents per kilo," he said.

Mundubberra mandarins headed for China
The first export shipment of citrus fruit to China has left Australia.
Previously fruit entered China through the so-called "grey channel" via Hong Kong.
On Friday a container of honey murcott mandarins from Mundubberra in Queensland's central Burnett region left under China's strict new export protocols.
The shipment will reach Beijing towards the end of the month, meaning fruit supplier Alan Jenkins has a nervous wait.
"We've done everything, we hope, right at this end," he said.
"We've been certified and inspected by AQIS, and we hope that's in line when it gets to China.

$50m for aquaculture, seafood firm
A Western Australian businessman has launched a $50 million buy-up of aquaculture farms in South Australia.
Analysts say the creation of a major seafood company could lead to better prices and major export deals for oyster growers.
The company known as Aqafood has entered contracts to buy several oyster farms on the Eyre Peninsula and an atlantic salmon and ocean trout farming operation in the south-east.
Adelaide business broker Martin White says the venture could see more seafood being sold in untapped export markets.
"It's a progression the industry needs to take, in as much as there isn't a corporatisation at all in a lot of the smaller aquaculture industries and I think to develop and grow the industries this is a positive approach," he said.

Diggers and Dealers conference kicks off in Kalgoorlie
Fifteen hundred miners have travelled from all over the globe to attend the annual Diggers and Dealers talkfest at Kalgoorlie in Western Australia.
The gold mining town is packed to capacity with some of the world leaders in the resource sector, with many delegates having to resort to camper vans and caravan sites for accommodation.
However, talk of moving the conference to a capital city is not being considered by chairman Brian Hurley.
"If it was in Perth or Melbourne or Sydney it would just be another conference," he said.

Comalco port gets $78m upgrade
The mining boom has seen record demand for aluminium, leading to record production of bauxite at Comalco's Weipa mine on Cape York.
After producing 16 million tonnes last year, the company is on track to set a new record. To cope with growing demand, the company has spent $78 million upgrading its port.
The main part of the upgrade is the installation of a second ship loader, which weighs 650 tonnes.
Weipa manager Rob Atkinson says it can fill giant ore ships in no time at all.
"The ship loader is basically a device which allows the bauxite from the stockpiles to be directly loaded into a ship and then it allows the bauxite to be fed into the ship at a rate of about 6,500 tonnes an hour," he said.

Scientist calls on SA farmers to collect rabbit livers
A South Australian scientist is calling on landholders across the country to collect the livers from dead rabbits found on their properties.
In October it will be 10 years since the calici virus was released in South Australia in an attempt to control rabbit numbers.
Ron Sinclair from the state's Department of Water, Land and Biodiversity says the livers will help researchers find out how the virus has evolved and whether it is still effective.
"It's not a very nice thing to do, to chop open a rabbit and take out a bit of liver, but we only need a little piece, about maybe a thumbnail size, chucked in a bottle and thrown into a freezer labelled and then call the local authority responsible for animal or plant control and let them know they have one," he said.

Thousands turn out for bush sports event
While more than 20,000 people are gathering for the annual Darwin Cup today, around 2,000 rolled up for the Hart Ranges bush sports in central Australia over the weekend.
Rodeo, gymkhana, athletics and novelty events like the kangaroo tail toss and lizard racing kept guests entertained, but the big draw card was the amateur horses races.
A young French woman who works in local Aboriginal communities took out the prized events - the Stockman's Bracelet, and the Stockman's Cup.
"I think on the first race, I'm not exactly sure but I was told I had about four lengths before the second horses, and on the second one I was a bit closer to the other horse, I think about two or three lengths as well in front of them," winner Alienor le Gouvello du Timat said.

Concerns over CSIRO, Genetic Solutions deal
There are concerns today that a new commercial relationship between Australia's national science agency and a gene technology company could hurt long-term research projects.
CSIRO has signed an agreement with Brisbane-based Genetic Solutions to become a shareholder in the company in exchange for its research into cattle genes.
Traditionally CSIRO gets royalties and licensing fees for its work.
Mick Keogh from the Australian Farm Institute is worried the deal may change CSIRO's focus, so it is chasing profits rather than undertaking long-term research.
"The New Zealand experience suggests that trying to have public research agencies be very strongly focussed on external earnings targets just diverts the whole thing," he said.
"Everything becomes short-term, the long-term blue sky projects just get left on the shelf and everything's about chasing earnings for this year or next year."

Aussies lose Iraqi wheat trade
A delegation from AWB has travelled to Iraq in an attempt to rebuild the company's damaged reputation.
Figures out of the US suggest it now has 72 per cent of the wheat trade with Iraq, once Australia's biggest grain export destination.
AWB chairman Brendan Stewart says the US is a major competitor and he cannot set a deadline on winning new wheat contracts.
He says the meeting was requested by Iraqi authorities.
"This is an initial re-engagement meeting and is really to talk about process, not to talk about tenders and prices and those sorts of things," he said.
Meanwhile, a group of grain growers - mainly from Western Australia - is investigating possible legal action against AWB.
The WA Pastoralists and Graziers Association says it is researching whether there are irregularities with AWB's incentive scheme.
The group of growers is concerned that $200 million could have been deducted from income that should have gone to growers.
The PGA's Leon Bradley says a legal firm has agreed to act on its behalf to investigate concerns.
"Well our first concern is that the benchmark itself is internally determined by the AWB and we're concerned about its integrity," he said.
"Secondly, with some of the evidence emerging at the Cole commission, we believe some of the prices that have been used to calculate their performance have been inflated."
AWB believes the PGA has misunderstood AWB's incentive scheme.
The company says will try to resolve the issue with the PGA before it embarks on legal action.

Documents decision
The Federal Court has told lawyers for AWB and the Commonwealth to meet privately to cull the controversial list of 1,300 secret documents.
Proceedings have been adjourned until this afternoon so the two parties can agree on a smaller and easier to manage list of communications between AWB and its lawyers.

Beef prices predicted to stay high
The outlook for the cattle industry remains bright, despite the lingering drought and the return of US beef exports to North Asia.
In its latest projections, Meat and Livestock Australia says beef prices should stay at their current high levels because exports and domestic consumption are set to rise.
Chief market analyst Peter Weeks says producers are continuing to pay top prices for grazing land, with production set for a record high next year.
"Rarely seen such a buoyant period, you've really had four or five years where the industry has been what you could describe as buoyant," he said.
"We've had this time round, we've got record prices, we've got near record production and we're thinking by 2:30 we might even have record production.

20,000 sheep up for sale online
The sheep market is strong, with more than 20,000 sheep up for sale on the Internet in Queensland.
That is three times the usual number.
Richard Murray from Landmark at Longreach says most of the sheep offered on Auctions Plus come from properties in western Queensland.
He says graziers are capitalising on strong demand for young ewes from central New South Wales, although abattoir-ready sheep are dominating the market.
"With the processor sheep, usually from mid August the prices tend to ease back a bit, so naturally people are trying to get their sheep onto the market before then," he said.
"It also fits in with the shearings, most of the shearings are done and they're sort of six to eight weeks off the board now, which is an ideal time to be selling the sheep."

Wool growers reject diazinon alternatives
The peak body representing wool growers wants to hold on to access to a common lice control chemical, despite health concerns.
The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority is recommending that diazinon no longer be used to dip or jet sheep.
Wool Producers's Greg Weller wants the authority to consider protective equipment and new methods for dipping, because some of the alternatives create other problems.

Claims grain companies under performing
There are claims today that Australia's key grain companies are under performing on the stock market.
Analyst Paul Jensz from Austock says AWB, ABB and Graincorp are returning between four and six cents for every dollar invested, compared to 10 to 15 cents for other investments.
He says the poor performance cannot be blamed entirely on seasonal conditions, and grower shareholders need to have more trust in external investors and prepare for life without the single desk for wheat exports.
"We would attribute maybe a third of the problem to seasonal issues," he said.
"But we do think even with those issues there is at least 60 per cent, two-thirds of the problem really, attributed towards structural changes in the industry and some problems within particular companies."

High temps hit US dairy farmers hard
A summer heatwave in the United States could be good news for Australian dairy exporters.
Temperatures above 35 degrees have taken a dramatic toll on dairy production in California, with many cows dying.
Dairy analyst Steve Spencer from FreshLogic says production on the west coast could drop by 20 per cent this month.
"California is the largest dairy state and that has a major impact on the industry," he said.
"There has been a cut in production, which will tighten their internal market.

Lack of feed causing sheep to suffer: RSPCA
The RSPCA is cracking down on farmers in WA, saying sheep are suffering due to a lack of feed.
Officers have visited more than 50 farms in the driest parts of the state.
Spokeswoman Emma-Jane Morcombe says the organisation wants to help farmers to find enough feed so their livestock can get through the tough season.
"You can call the RSPCA because we will come in and, as I said, we're giving advice right now," she said.

Murray River system needs 'a lot of rain'
Water inflows to the Murray River system over the past five years have been the lowest on record and this year is shaping up to be another tough one.
With inflows since 2001 at just 40 per cent of the long-term average, Trevor Jacobs from River Murray Water says a lot of rain is needed.
"The catchments aren't responding well yet to rainfall," he said.

Stellar season boosts machinery dealers confidence
One of the best seasons in years in South Australia has machinery dealers confident of big sales at this year's Eyre Peninsula Field Days.
High fuel prices and low commodities have not deterred thousands from attending the biggest event on every farmers calendar in South Australia.
The Eyre Peninsula Field Days plays host to more than 650 sites of large machinery and rural supplies along the outskirts of the small town of Cleve, one-and-a-half hours north of Port Lincoln.
The season in this part of the world has been treated well, with some saying it is one of the best they have seen. Others claim the stem rust could be the downfall of this year's crop.

Kalgoorlie lacking gold treatment facilities, conference told
Treatment mills in Kalgoorlie in Western Australia are working overtime to turn as much ore into gold bars to take advantage of record gold prices.
This week the Kalgoorlie region is hosting the Diggers and Dealers conference, attended by some of the world's leaders in the resource sector.
Analyst Dr Sandra Close has told the conference that local plants cannot keep up with the amount of gold being dug up to ship overseas.
"One of the actual problems we are actually seeing - I guess, in a way, it is a good problem to have - and that is there is a lack of gold treatment facilities in the Kalgoorlie area,' she said.

Divided views on wheat marketing
Four hundred delegates met at the Agriculture Australia conference and all eyes and ears were on a panel session - looking at the future of the wheat industry in the face of AWB inquiry. The key question was should growers retain the single desk, and if so, should they allow AWB to continue to manage it? The Grains Council of Australia, which represents state-based grains bodies, says producers want to keep the systems as it stands until the end of the Cole inquiry. But as pressure mounts from the impending cost of the inquiry, the Grain Growers Association, which represents 17,000 producers on the Eastern seaboard, says there's little choice but to change. So what options should growers go with? On the one side, international traders who want to get a share in the market say growers have nothing to lose. On the other hand, AWB has staunchly defended the benefits of having a single marketer as the best way to maximise returns to growers.

Grain dispute settled out of court
A legal dispute over grain warehoused by Creasy's Grain Enterprises has been settled out of court. When Creasy's collapsed last year, the receiver Ferrier Hodgson cited a 1933 High Court to claim title to a significant tonnage of grain stored under warehouse agreements. The Whillock family from the north-west, with financial and legal support from the Australian Farmers Fighting Fund, challenged that claim in the courts. A settlement of $97,000 has now been reached, returning the full market value of the grain to the Whillock family, plus a large portion of the legal costs. The NSW Farmers Association took up the fight for the Whillock family and the president, Jock Laurie, says although a legal precedent was not set it's still a significant win for the family. Meanwhile, Jackie Whillock has mixed feelings about the case. She's glad that they've received the full value of the grain, but disappointed the 1933 ruling hasn't been overturned.

Live at the Agriculture Australia 2006 conference
Matt O'Sullivan brings you National Rural News today live from the Agriculture Australia conference in Sydney.
MATTHEW O'SULLIVAN: Hello, I'm Matt O'Sullivan, bringing you National Rural News today from the Agriculture Australia conference in Sydney, the peak gathering for the grains industry.
As you'd expect the future of the single desk for wheat exports is a hot topic, and confusion seems to be the common theme.
The future of GM crops is also being debated today and, of course, there's plenty of speculation about whether we'll actually get a decent grain harvest this season - as the ongoing dry drags on, many parts of Australia desperately need follow up rains.
But everybody seems to be talking about alternative fuels, with crude oil prices hitting new highs this week. Delegates believe it's time the Federal Government offered new incentives to make the switch to ethanol and biodiesel.
DELEGATE: "I think there is such an abundance of energy in Australia, you know, they're not very worried about it. They might as well just sit on their arse and not worry about it."
DELEGATE: "We're not getting any results at all with the biofuel. The Government's just not interested to mandate it, and this is not actually going to get off the ground until it's actually mandated, so it's really up to the Government."
DELEGATE: "This issue is now on the table, it's here. And we can't afford to be sitting in here in three years' time not really knowing where we'll be and not picking up on the advantage that is there right now."
DELEGATE: "I fully support the biofuel concept in industry. I disagree with the fact that they'll be getting an excise and I want a level playing field in terms of acquisition of raw material."
MOS: Certainly, there's a feeling that the Government needs to do more, and the grains industry needs to do more as well to get on the front foot and make sure that grain growers have a big slice of this market for grain. There does seem to be a concern that Australia is a long way behind other countries in tapping into the ethanol and biodiesel markets. One of the speakers here today is Terry Reinhart from Advance Trading in the US. Thanks for joining us, can you give us an idea of the industry in the US?
TERRY REINHART: Today, it's about a 4.2 billion gallon industry, which compares to five years ago when it was about a 1 billion gallon industry, and projections are that by 2010 it'll be a 10 billion gallon industry.
MOS: So does a country like Australia have a long way to go to try and catch up to that? Can we catch up to that?
TR: The good news about ethanol is it's a 3000-year-old process by which you take corn and distil it into ethanol, so it's not real rocket science, and if you have the money it's fairly quick to build. You can build a 100 million gallon plant in 15 to 16 months, so it's not like it takes 20 years to develop this thing.
MOS: One of the big concerns here is from end users of feed grain, that it'll be much more expensive and it'll be harder to get access to that grain. How is the corn going into ethanol in the US affected the market there?
TR: To date, there hasn't been any effect on the end user, because corn is still relatively cheap. Today in the US we're over supplied with corn, which is one of the motivators to develop ethanol as a demand for corn, but down the road, as we continue to increase their production, we're going to have to price corn as fuel as opposed to pricing corn as food and the livestock producer is concerned greatly in the US also.
MOS: That, I think, is going to be a growing theme, isn't it, that you have more and more different types of grain going into producing fuel and into producing food, when that's a big issue?
TR: Yeah, it's a big issue, and you can kind of sum up the whole thing if you go back to, I think it was 1998, one barrel of crude would buy 4.7 bushels of corn and today one barrel of crude would buy 30 bushels of corn, so the price relationship strongly favours corn as a fuel as opposed to being a food.
MOS: In terms of the US industry, here in Australia we've got a lot of different plants setting up in small operations. There's no sort of overall structure. Is that going to tell against Australia in the long run?
TR: I don't know. In the US, there's not much structure at this point either. The early people in the ethanol industry were the Cargills and the ADMs of the world. They've been making ethanol for quite some time, but all the new capacity or much of the new capacity is small start-up operations, groups of farmers going together investing in ethanol plants and there's not much organisation today to all the ethanol plants that are out there and time will tell. My guess is some of these plants are built in the right place and some of them aren't, and we'll just have to see over time which ones were built in the right place.
MOS: I see a story quoting Sir Richard Branson saying he's investing in ethanol plants in the US. Are they starting to attract that big business investment?
TR: Yes. Early on, four or five years ago, capital was a problem and you just worked and worked and worked to try and find enough money to build an ethanol plant. To put it in perspective, to build a 100 million gallon plant - which is the one they're building now - it takes about $170 million to build that plant. Whereas five or 10 years ago it was terribly difficult to raise that money, today you're hearing stories of people raising that kind of money in 30 and 60 day periods.
MOS: So there's reason for farmers getting involved in this to have some hope that it will take-off?
TR: In the US, I'd say it has taken off, it really has. And the limiting resource in the US right now is plant capacity. And if we build all the plants that are on the drawing board today, the limiting resource is soon going to become farmland, enough land to produce enough corn to feed the ethanol plants.
MOS: Thanks for your time, Terry Reinhart from Advance Trading in the US.
You're listening to a special broadcast of National Rural News from the Agriculture Australia conference in Sydney.
Of course, alternative fuels hasn't been the only item on the agenda here - an entire session has been devoted to the future of the single desk for wheat exports in the aftermath of the oil-for-food Inquiry.
Reporter Alice Plate sat in on the session - and Alice, what's the feeling about the future of our wheat export system?
ALICE PLACE: Well the feeling has actually changed a bit. In the past, many growers, I think, have tried to separate the single desk issue, that is, AWB's right to veto other exporters' applications to sell wheat overseas, from the ongoing oil-for-food inquiry. And yesterday, at the panel, many of the growers groups admitted that change is now inevitable.
MOS: They're unsure though about what sort of system they want for the future, is that right?
AP: That's right. Looking at the single desk marketing system, it's not simple, by anyone's analysis of it. Breaking it down, you've got on one side the traders, other major competitors - CBH, Graincorp, and the like - all trying to get into that market, saying that they can give growers better returns. And AWB, on the other hand, is saying that it can maximise returns for growers and give them security. But the Grains Council of Australia, which represents state-based grower bodies, says that the majority of growers don't want a change from what they've got. They want AWB to stay there. They want the single desk. On the other hand, the Grain Growers Association, which is east coast grain growers, says growers do want to know more about their options, that they are really starting to question the current system.
MOS: So are they looking for more leadership from the grains bodies?
AP: That's right. We did have a grower stand up yesterday and say, "Why aren't you putting forward options and recommending those to us?" And we have seen the Grains Council of Australia, they have done independent reports, also they've looked at the Victorian Farmers Federation's option for the single desk, but they're saying they're unwilling to analyse and make those recommendations until the Cole inquiry wraps up in September.
MOS: Thanks Alice. Speaking of the inquiry, AWB has told the Federal Court today it will cut by a third the number of documents it's battling to keep away from the Cole inquiry. Lawyers for the wheat exporter have told the court that nearly 400 documents will be struck from the confidential list, leaving 900 still to be contested. And that hearing is continuing in Melbourne.
Here at the conference, reporter Michael Condon has been in one of the GM sessions. What has been discussed?
MICHAEL CONDON: One of the contentious issues surrounding the grains industry always is genetically modified crops, particularly food crops. Today we've heard a couple of distinct points of view expressed. We heard from the the director of scientific affairs for Monsanto. He's actually addressing the conference as we speak now. Bit of a coup for the conference.
He's come from the United States saying that he knows that farmers already support GM crops. He says they get better yields. They use fewer chemicals. They have higher initial seed costs, but those are easily recouped. He's saying thatHe's saying that farmers are in favour. He does concede, though, that there is a bit of a way to go to convince consumers about eating the food that's made from g-m crops. Monsanto, of course, famously put their GM wheat on hold for the time being. He says there are no plans to change that.
But Mr Glick says he's got a strong feeling that consumers will soon be convinced. They'll come to the party, he says. They'll realise that g-m crops can do all sorts of things. They can put in special oils to reduce heart disease. They can have certain complex carbohydrates to combat diabetes, and g-m foods also have less exposure to chemicals in the growing process. So he says he thinks they will be convinced.
MOS: What about the food companies? What do they think about that?
MC: At this stage, George Weston Foods general manager was here as well. He was asked that question. He said at this stage consumers aren't ready. They'd prefer to see the segregation process remain. He was particularly relating to canola. Keep the oilseeds separate that are GM. The other, that's non-GM is used in food. But he said too that he thought that eventually consumers would change their attitudes, and it was up to industry and up to research to try and find ways of promoting health benefits in GM to consumers as well.
MOS: Thanks Michael, reporter Michael Condon here.

Cole inquiry set to resume public hearings
The Cole inquiry into the oil-for-food scandal will resume public hearings in Sydney in less than two weeks after delays caused by a legal challenge to the release of documents.
Board members of wheat exporter AWB could be among those called to give evidence from August 22, although witness details have not been confirmed.

Irrigators fined for stealing water
Two irrigators in south-west New South Wales have been fined for stealing water.
The state's Department of Natural Resources claims a farmer at Euston was found to have extracted more water than he was entitled to, while an irrigator at Barham tampered with a meter on a water pump.
Department spokesman Peter Wells says the breaches were discovered during routine monitoring and prompted follow-up investigations.
"In a drought it's more important than ever that everyone sticks to the rules because the rivers are very stressed the other users are typically on low or nil irrigation requirements," he said.

Wool growers plan ethical wool brand launch
A group of wool growers is planning to launch an ethical wool brand to try to capitalise on consumer demand for environmentally and humanely grown products.
The Australian Wool Growers Association says new branding and marketing innovations are needed to help lift low wool prices and stop the loss of growers from the industry.
Director Will Crozier wants to see all sectors of the growing, processing and manufacturing chain benefit from the brand.
"Our brokers have been talking to people in China and Italy," he said.

Fruit and vegie campaign push gains momentum
An international push to encourage more people to eat fruit and vegetables is gathering momentum.
Backed by the World Health Organisation, the campaign encouraging people to eat two serves of fruit and five vegetables every day is running in 10 countries to try to reduce disease and death rates.
President of the International Fruit and Vegetable Alliance Ron Lemaire says increased consumption will help growers as well as save lives.
"In WA we know that right now there is 97 per cent awareness of the 'two and five' campaign, they have already increased the number of servings by one per day per person, we already see improved health within that community, we already see reduced health care costs," he said.
"The producer also benefits through increased sales.

Wine blueprint to focus on new innovations
New innovations dominate a new seven year blueprint for the Australian wine industry which was launched in Adelaide this morning.
Compiled by the Australian Wine Research Institute, the plan looks at what consumers want from their wine, how growers and wineries can improve production and how to ease the grape glut.
Managing director Sakkie Pretorius says it will help the industry to stay competitive.

Rural commodity price index up 2.5pc
Stronger global commodity prices are helping to offset rising interest rates and the higher value of the Australia dollar.
The Westpac-National Farmers Federation rural commodity price index for July was up 2.5 per cent on the same time last year.
The jump is being attributed to solid demand and dry seasonal conditions in the Northern Hemisphere.
Meanwhile the cotton industry is predicting prices to jump to more than $400 a bale next year due to demand from China.

Surveys to try and identify Timor Sea diamond fields
Oil companies working in the Timor Sea have discovered that there may be diamonds on the Tiwi Islands.
Oil and gas explorers have found evidence of kimberlite, the host rock of diamonds, in the ocean floor west of Melville and Bathurst Islands.
As a result, the Northern Territory's Department of Mines will carry out aerial magnetic surveys of the islands to try to identify new diamond fields.
Richard Brescianini, director of the Northern Territory Geological Survey, dreams of finding a major deposit.

Court dismisses farmer's uranium concerns
A farmer at Esperance in Western Australia is fighting to stop uranium exploration on her property.
Yvonne Hallam took court action this week to try to stop the exploration application but her case was dismissed.
She says she is worried about biosecurity problems from letting people on to her land.
"I think we've got the right to continue with the farming that we've been doing for probably 40 years, and people before us, and people after us without having to worry about who's coming and going, and opening, and shutting gates, or maybe not shutting gates and all that sort of thing," she said.

More women entering mining workforce
The resources boom has led to a more women enter the mining workforce across Australia.
More than 3,500 women have started work on mine sites over the past three years and now make up 18 per cent of the workforce.
And Mitch Hooke from the Minerals Council says the trend will have to continue to make up for a severe shortage of workers.
"They are attracted by pay, yes they are attracted by the opportunity but they've started to see that the macho image of the mining industry is not quite as stringent as it was," he said.
"Don't forget women make the best truck drivers.
"I mean we've got a couple of mine managers that are women, we've got an Indigenous female mining engineer.

Bull sale 'solid'
It was a big day in Broome in northern Western Australia yesterday, with Ladies Day at the races and the annual bull sale.
One hundred and thirty-six beasts went under the hammer, with a Kimberley pastoralist paying the top price of $4,500 for a brahman bull.
Tony Cooling from Landmark Broome says the sale was solid, without being outstanding.
"We had a very very good clearance, the average was slightly up on last year so both the vendors were smiling and the purchasers all got the fair share of bulls," he said.

NSW producer's cattle sets record price at Ekka
A New South Wales beef producer has had a very successful trip to the Ekka in Brisbane.
After a 12 hour drive from Singleton, in the Hunter Valley, Greg Ball has scored wins in three of the four categories of the lead steer competition at the annual agricultural show.
And the auction of his winning prime cattle, set a record price.
"Twenty-seven dollars a kilo for the champion steer - I think that'd be the most money we've ever received for a steer at a competition and I think some people are claiming it as an Australian record, I don't know," he said.

Tassie camembert takes out world cheese award
A Tasmanian camembert has beaten the country that invented it at a world cheese show in the United States.
The winning sample from the National Foods' cheese factory in Burnie was up against 100 entries from all over the world, including the best from France.
Chuffed cheese maker Kurt Wyss says the Tasmanian Heritage Signature Camembert is unlike any other in the world.
"It really stands out compared to other camemberts as the flavour is a more fuller, earthier and a really, really creamy texture," he said.

Govt accused of sitting on oil review
The Democrats have accused the Federal Government of failing to force the major oil companies to meet their biofuels targets.
The party believes the Government is sitting on a review which reveals the oil companies are less than halfway towards meeting their target of selling 350 megalitres of biofuel by 2010.
Nationals Senator Ron Boswell also believes the oil retailers are not making a big enough effort to adopt alternative fuels.
"I know fairly closely that from the time the Prime Minister called the oil companies in, the oil companies promised the Government that they would sell 89 million litres this year, we're now almost in September and I would expect they've sold about 10 million litres," he said.
"Now that is not honouring the commitment to the Government ... and they need to be brought to account."
The Federal Government has defended the oil companies, saying they are on track to reach the target.
Meanwhile the nation's peak motoring body says fuel prices could surge to a $1.80 a litre by the end of the year.
Alan Evans from the Australian Automobile Association says there has been trouble in the Alaskan oil fields, Nigeria and the Middle East which makes us vulnerable to a price increase:

Forrest defends decision to abstain on migration Bill
