Kulukuk farm mud crab trial breeds success
A Darwin Aboriginal community has succeeded in growing out its first farmed mud crabs, as part of a commercial trial.
So far 600 crabs weighing an average of 350 grams have been sold to wholesalers.
The trial is part of a Commonwealth Government Shared Responsibility Agreement.
The Kululuk farm employs eight people, including traditional owner Jacqueline Treves.
"We seem to be one of the first people in Darwin to grow our own mud crab farm," she said.
"Now that we have got one, we just want to make it work for us and our children.
"It's important because we want good jobs for younger Indigenous people and for our own children.

Country women gather for field day
Almost 150 women made their way to Buntine in the West Australian Wheatbelt for the annual Liebe Women's field day yesterday.
Those who attended say it was a good opportunity to get away from the farm and socialise with other farming women who are also struggling with the dry start to 2006.
"These sorts of days are even more important when you realise you're actually not alone and that everybody's going through the same pain," said Sally Lee from the Wubin district.

US growers slam 'sham' Australian wheat deal
US Wheat Associates has accused Australia of putting together a sham deal to sell wheat to Iraq.
Loading has begun in Geelong of the first shipment of wheat to Iraq since a ban was imposed on trade with AWB earlier this year.
US Wheat Associates claims the Wheat Australia consortium's 350,000 tonne contract is just a way for AWB to get around the ban.
It accuses AWB of selling to Iraq from its wheat pool through the consortium.
Rebecca Coleman says AWB still controls the pricing.
"We think that the Wheat Australia situation is pretty much a shell game, a sham and a way that allows for AWB to continue to funnel wheat to Iraq and avoid the sanctions that are currently in place," she said.
Ms Coleman says Iraq is now one of the US's top 10 wheat customers.

Dry weather hits WA grain harvest
Western Australian broadacre farmers could be confronting one of their worst harvest seasons in history, after another month of warm and unseasonably dry conditions.
The state's grain handler and marketer, Co-operative Bulk Handling, had earlier predicted that summer subsoil moisture would help produce a crop of around 11 million tonnes, despite an historically dry start to winter.
But operations manager David Fienberg says the entire state's yield could now be as low as 7 million tonnes.
"What we're concerned about is keeping farmers on farm and of course that directly relates to their profitability and of course that comes from volume," he said.
"My gut feeling is that lupins are going to be considerably down compared to where they might have been given that early break in summer, I think canola also going to be substantially down."

Poor harvest sends farmers to other jobs
As the dry spell continues in Western Australia, young farmers are already starting to consider their options off-farm.
Many farmers are opting not to put a crop in this year.
Wes Teakle, from Northampton, is going to build sheds because there is no money to be made on the land this year.
"I know of half a dozen guys, just off the top of my head, that are doing the same thing that I'm doing and looking for alternate work," he said.
"Unfortunately there's not enough room for all of us in a small town like Northampton or Geraldton.

Cowra abattoir cleared over sackings
The Cowra abattoir in New South Wales has been cleared over its decision to dismiss 29 employees under the new WorkChoices laws, and re-hire some under a different award.
The Office of Workplace Services has found the company did not break the new laws, and its actions would still have been lawful under the old legislation.
The Federal Government says it has been vindicated by the ruling.

Anderson urged to put off retirement
Former deputy prime minister John Anderson is reportedly being urged by the National Party to shelve his retirement plans, to try to stop his federal seat from being abolished.
The Nationals say the Australian Electoral Commission's plan to merge the Gwydir electorate with Parkes in New South Wales is an attack on country Australia.
As well as urging the commission to hear community concerns firsthand, Gwydir Electorate Council chairman, Mark Coulton, wants people of all political persuasions to lobby against the proposal.
"John made the point yesterday that if he was still the deputy prime minister, would Gwydir have been abolished?" he said.
"I think everyone knows the answer would be no, so whether John stays or not is a different issue.
"A simple solution like that I think we're too far down the track for that." 

Commonwealth urged to heed environmental management survey
The first survey of how farmers are managing the environment shows more than 90 per cent are undertaking improvement works.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics research also shows most farmers consider weeds, pests and native vegetation to be their biggest concerns.
Farmer groups say the findings should influence the Federal Government, which is deciding how to fund natural resource management.
Corey Watts, from the Conservation Foundation, says a range of factors influence the amount of time and money farmers spend on conservation works.
"A lot has to do with the ability of people to be able to receive the kinds of resources that they need to plan and undertake works at different scales," he said.
"Drought is a big one - a number of parts of the country are in drought and that really does stuff up people's ability to do what needs to be done in the long-term.

Rural Commodity Index rises 8pc
Agricultural commodity prices remain strong, with the Westpac-National Farmers Federation Rural Commodity Index up nearly 8 per cent compared to this time last year.
Dairy is the only sector which has fallen below last year's level.
In the past month, barley, canola, cotton and wool have gone up, with small falls in sugar and beef.
Justin Smirk, from Westpac, says while prices are pretty good at the moment, next year could be a different story if the world economy slows down.
"However, as you move into 2007, those positive price responses will mean you'll get a supply response," he said.
"In addition, with interest rates around the world rising, does suggest it will be a softer year.

Rig demand delays geosequestration trial
Researchers say the first Australian trial of technology to try to trap greenhouse gases underground is being delayed.
The $30 million geosequestration project in south-west Victoria aims to test whether carbon dioxide from coal burning power stations and gas mining can be stored underground.
The Federal Government has funded the project as one of its preferred ways of combating climate change.
The project's leader, Dr Peter Cook, says preliminary tests are being carried out but he does not expect to be able to start pumping carbon dioxide underground until next year.
"A lot of people want to drill for oil at the moment so it's a bit hard to get rigs," he said.
"Also it's a constraint on us that costs have generally gone up.
"We're not a major company, we're a research organisation with limited funds so we have to be rather careful the way that we use those funds.

Cattle killers thought highly organised
Police in Western Australia suspect there may be an organised network killing pastoral cattle to sell their meat.
Seven cows have been reported butchered on Pilbara stations in the past month, and police believe there may be more which have not been reported.
Pastoralist Richard Climas, from Mardie Station 150 kilometres west of Karratha, says cattle theft is becoming a regular occurrence.
"I've found a few carcasses, generally only the legs and hide left, and they've taken the whole lot," he said.
"It happens quite often. A good bull at the moment is probably worth $600, $700 a beast, it adds up pretty quick.
"What else are they doing while they're out there?
"If they're brazen enough to kill a beast what else are they going to be doing while they're out and about?
"We've had solar panels stolen and all sorts of stuff stolen."
Further north in the Kimberley, the state's stock squad says there has been significant cattle thefts over the past 12 months.

Cane smut found on 30 properties
Sugar cane smut has now been found on 30 farms in the Childers area of south-east Queensland.
The disease, which can cause major crop losses, was found for the first time on the east coast less than a month ago.
Chris Adriaanson, from Queensland's Department of Primary Industries, says the disease will not be eradicated.
He says in the future, farmers will have to rely on resistant crop varieties to eliminate the impact of the disease.
"It depends on what you define as eradication," he said.
"If eradicating means biologically extinguishing the disease, then that's never been the objective, it's not part of the way we have to do this business.

Abattoir closure to impact on livestock producers
Livestock producers in South Australia's north say they will be hit by higher freight costs, after the closure of Conroy's abattoir at Port Pirie.
The plant closed on Friday and sold to T and R Pastoral, which has no plans to reopen it in the short-term.
One hundred people were employed at the abattoir.
Sandy Morris from Yardea Station in the Gawler Ranges says it will cost him up to $5 a head more to send stock to the meatworks at Murray Bridge instead.
"The impact on us will be that we won't have the option to send them to Pirie which is the closest abattoir for us," he said.
"We'd have to send them on to Murray Bridge, which would be double the amount of freight.
"I'm not quite sure how far Murray Bridge would be from Pirie but it would have to be another 250 [kilometres] I'd imagine. Probably looking at something like $2.50-$5.00."
Meanwhile an abattoir at Stanthorpe, in southern Queensland, says it had to temporarily shut down this morning after temperatures dropped to -20.
The Bureau of Meteorology has reported temperatures of minus six at nearby Warwick and Applethorpe.
John Allan from Don Allan and Co says the abattoir's hot water system froze.
"We still haven't started work because the cold outside froze the pressure of the steam inside our steam valves," he said.
"It just blew from sheer pressure, so that's letting all the steam out now, so we have to replace that now.

Australians crave roast dinner: anthropologist
A visiting anthropologist claims the Australian love of a good roast dinner is healthy and in our genes.
Dr Lionel Tiger is being sponsored by Meat and Livestock Australia, which has run a campaign linking human brain evolution to the consumption of meat.
Dr Tiger says a survey has found 78 per cent of Australians rate a roast as among their all-time favourite meals and it is a more natural craving than those for sugar and fat-rich processed foods.
"Australian beef is grass-fed and a lot of the hostility to beef depends in part on the American style of making beef which is grain-fed and therefore much fattier," he said.

Citrus growers set to export to China
Strict quarantine measures have finally been agreed upon to send citrus fruit into China, with the first exports due to leave later this month.
Growers had hoped China would help solve some of Australia's oversupply problems, but Judith Damiani says it is not yet known how much fruit will be exported this year.
Ms Damiani says prices are also uncertain.
"The quarantine requirements make it fairly difficult to put a lot of volume of fruit into that China market," she said.
"So we will have to start very slowly, we'll have to do some trial shipments initially and after two years we will have to look at amending the protocol and making it easier to ship there."
Richie Roberts from Renmark says his fruit company will start packing fruit for China early next week.
"We're very keen to get several containers to China just to test the market because there's so much work that the industry's put in to get access," he said.

Wine exports jump
Wine exports jumped 12 per cent during the last financial year but prices suffered, according to new figures from the Wine and Brandy Corporation.
Seven hundred and thirty eight million litres were exported, with wineries selling a large amount of bulk wine to reduce surplus stocks.

Cotton properties fail to sell
Two large multi-million dollar cotton properties in south west Queensland have failed to sell at auction.
The Queensland Government had planned to buy the farms to return water to the Murray Darling Basin, but withdrew because it did not have the support of the New South Wales or Federal Governments.
The properties, Clyde and Ballandool, with water licences totalling 58,000 megalitres were expected to make about $60 million at auction on Friday.
Ballandool was passed in at $20 million, while Clyde is still under negotiation at $27 million.
Ian Cush from the New South Wales Irrigators Association says the properties have little stored water and growers could not afford to invest and not have a return.

Code of conduct for pig welfare criticised
The animal rights group Voiceless has criticised the Federal Government's draft code of conduct for pig welfare, claiming it is inaccurate and limits public consultation.
Voiceless says the proposed code invites the public to make submissions through a survey which restricts objections to things like sow stalls.
Spokeswoman Katrina Sharman says the code also incorrectly claims other countries have no plans to phase out sow stalls, which is inhibiting public debate.
"The regulatory impact statement which accompanies the code suggests in Denmark, which is a major competitor to Australia's pig meat market, there are no plans to phase out sow stalls," she said.

Grain production forecasts down
Strong global wheat prices are the only bright spot for growers at the moment, with production forecasts down right around the country.
Queensland has all but given up on its winter wheat, it is a similar case in WA, while New South Wales and Victoria are doing it tough, with weeds the latest threat to young crops.
It is a gloomy picture right around the country, with South Australia the only state expected to deliver a reasonable harvest.
But grains analyst Lloyd George says with international stocks expected to tighten, good prices should continue.

Dry Seasons Advisory Committee activated
With Western Australia struggling through its driest start to winter on record, the State Government has activated its Dry Seasons Advisory Committee.
To be formed this week, the committee will include farm bodies, farm management consultants, rural business and local and state government.
Dexter Davies will again chair the committee, which last operated between 2000 and 2002, and says there are a range of areas to be addressed.
"Identify the worst areas, things like health services, the education services, all the basic services to make sure that we've got enough there and people have got somewhere to turn to very early in the piece," he said.

Chapman Valley victorious in Powder Puff footy match
When times are tough it is even more important to have a laugh and there were plenty on hand at the annual Powder Puff footy match in WA's Chapman Valley at the weekend.
The game pits the Valley girls against the Northampton girls in front of a bid crowd of local farmers.
Abbey Langley of Northampton kicked a ripper goal on the siren and explains how it all happened.
"One of our players high tackled a Chapman Valley girl and they went to kick it and I was just in the right spot at the right time," she said.
"And I marked it. I don't know how far I was out, but I thought I wasn't going to get it.
"But I thought I'd better have a crack at it on the siren. So yeah, it was pretty funny. It's good fun."

Organiser pleased with beef auction prices
Central Australian beef has attracted record prices at a weekend auction at the Alice Springs Show.
The champion steer carcass, from the Holt family of Delny Station, sold for $6.70 a kilogram.
Competition organiser Nicole Hayes says she was surprise that so many drought-hit pastoralists supported the auction.
"Considering the season, we are pleased with that," she said.
"We had to support it so you have sort of got to put in what you have got and considering how dry it is at home, it's good to see.
"We just haven't got the cattle that we would have had in previous years. Our numbers are going to be right down, especially for next year.
"There's not many little calves around which is a bit unfortunate but it's as good as we can do.

Apple growers take advantage of Italian World Cup win
Apple orchardists in central western New South Wales are already trying to take advantage of this morning's World Cup win by Italy.
Italian-born, but proud Australian orchardist Guy Gaeta says he is looking for white apples to blend with his fruit.
"We have got red and green apples I suppose but unfortunately we haven't got any white ones," he said.

Ship owners back moves for cheaper foreign workers
Ship owners say the latest move to replace Australian crew members with foreign workers is important for the competitiveness of our exports.
Crew members from the MV Stolt, currently docked in Hobart, are refusing to load the tanker in protest at plans to re-flag the vessel and replace them.
But Llew Russell from Shipping Australia Limited says it is cheaper to use foreign workers and the trend is likely to continue.
"We certainly support viable and competitive Australian flagged shipping but this should not be in terms of inhibiting our overseas competitiveness," he said.

Farm quarantined after BJD find
Just when many farmers in Western Australia thought the season could not get any worse, there has been confirmation of a fatal wasting disease in a cattle herd.
The Department of Agriculture and Food says a farm near Albany in the state's Great Southern, has been placed under quarantine, in a bid to prevent further spread of bovine Johne's disease (BJD).
The state's BJD-free status is now under threat.
Chief vet Dr Peter Buckman says an extensive testing process is now under way to try to trace beef cattle which have been sold off the farm in the past decade.

Mining company shares continue trading halt
Shares in Australian Mining Investment remain in a trading halt because of concerns over whether the company has disclosed enough information to the stockmarket.
The Queensland explorer shot from obscurity last week when its shares jumped 2,000 per cent after it discovered rich veins of copper at its Rocklands deposit near Cloncurry.
However, Hartley's resource expert Rob Brierley says the Australian Securities and Investment Commission is now querying whether the drill results meet market standards.

Govt urged to rework fuel tax bill
There are claims today that the Federal Government's complex fuel tax bill could spell the end of the biofuels industry.
The renewable fuel sector says investors are being turned away because the bill has reduced its access to the market since its introduction on July 1.
Bob Gordon from Renewable Fuels Australia says the Federal Government needs to go back to the drawing board to make the legislation fairer.
"Unlike the rest of the world which is surging ahead with biofuels industry growth and all of those countries that have emerging biofuel industries have high tariff regimes to protect them against imports until they're established in the market," he said.
"Australia is going in the opposite direction. Progress is going to freeze in Australia, if not worse."
A Victorian dairy company says with the a growing number of biofuel projects on the drawing board, companies will have to convince the Federal Government to offer tax incentives.
John McLean from the Warrnambool Cheese and Butter Factory says his company wants to use bio-gas from its cheesemaking operation as a dual fuel for its milk tankers.

VFF group calls for restructure
There are calls today for a major restructure of the Victorian Farmers Federation (VFF).
The VFF's livestock group says its membership has fallen from 6,000 to 3,000 and it may no longer be able to afford representation on peak industry bodies like the Sheepmeat Council.
Group president Ailsa Fox says the VFF needs to change the way it allocates its budget.
"There's two ways of dealing with this question, whilst we need more funds, our executive officer identified that there is perhaps resources that could be shared a lot better within the organisation," she said.

Sheep thefts may lead to more livestock truck checks
Police on South Australia's Eyre Peninsula say they may resort to checking every livestock truck on the region's roads after a growing number of sheep thefts.
About 1,200 sheep have been reported stolen this year, including 250 head from near Wudinna this week.
Senior-Sergeant Paul Roberts says all peninsula police stations have been alerted.
"It may well be that we want the staff to stop all stock crates that are moving throughout the local service area and along the highways," he said.

US wheat farmers sue AWB
Six American wheat farmers have launched a class action against AWB in the United States, claiming the wheat exporter's dealings in overseas markets damaged their own incomes.
According to media reports, the US wheat farmers are alleging AWB engaged in a global campaign of racketeering, money laundering, fraud and bribery.
While some of the allegations relate to the Iraq market, others relate to deals in Yemen, Pakistan and Indonesia.
The US farmers are arguing for millions of dollars in compensation, claiming AWB's actions resulted in them being excluded from certain wheat markets and damaged their economic interests.
But law Professor Richard Garnett says even if the action is successful, there are doubts about whether AWB in Australia could be financially liable.
"We don't generally recognise judgments from foreign countries which are punitive or designed to punish defendents, we only recognise judgments which are compensatory, where a sum of money is provided in compensation for losses," he said.
AWB, which has not yet been served with the writ, says the actions are ill conceived and the company will vigorously defend any claims.
Meanwhile the first shipment of 350,000 tonnes of grain through the Wheat Australia consortium is expected to set sail for Iraq this week.
But AWB International says if there is a new tender to supply Iraq it would prefer to strike the deal itself.
The Iraqi Grains Board has refused to deal with AWB because of its involvement in the oil-for-food scandal.
But AWB International chairman Ian Donges is hoping for a change of heart.
"We'll wait for that tender of course and we'll be talking to Iraq in terms of whether the ban still applies to AWB firstly," he said.

CSIRO begins researching grape quality potential
New equipment is being developed to measure the potential quality of grapes before they are harvested.
The CSIRO has been researching the links between grapes and the quality of the wine they produce, using chemical and sensory analysis.
It is hoped the research can be used to develop bio-sensor technology, which will be used to test grapes at the vineyard or weighbridge.
CSIRO scientist Dr Aggie Cox says that should help growers receive fairer prices.
"What we're basically trying to do is look for things that we can measure to be able to tell us what sort of wines those grapes can produce," he said.
"And the reason we're doing that is to try and make the wine a lot more consistent so the winemakers have some sort of idea of what that parcel of grape is potentially able to produce in the end.

Beekeepers discuss industry's future
Australia's leading beekeepers are in Launceston today discussing the challenges of falling honey prices and the growing threat of disease.
It is estimated that the beekeeping industry is worth $1.7 billion to Australian agriculture, and at today's meeting, apiarists from around the country are deciding how best to allocate the annual half-a-million-dollar research and development budget to protect the future of the industry.
Chief among concerns is the threat of the verroa mite, which has already decimated the US industry and was found in New Zealand's South Island just three weeks ago.

Mahogony timber harvest headed for floorboarding
The first commercial timber harvest from far north Western Australia is destined to be floorboarding for Perth's housing boom.
Indian sandalwood was supposed to be grown in the Ord River pilot project, but the trees were taken over by african mahogany, with 300 hectares now harvested.
Max Correy from the Kimberley Timber Company says the mahogany trees seem to enjoy the irrigated growing conditions.
"All the other mahogany plantations, which have more or less been trial plantations are all dry-land," he said.
"And of course they are looking at two to two and a half, maybe three times the growth time frame that we are.

Wwoofers on the increase in Aust
Australia now has the largest number of wwoofers in the world.
The term wwoofing stands for "willing workers on organic farms" where travellers help with farmwork in exchange for food and board.
Australia has around 11,000 wwoofers working on 1,600 farms each year.
Jordyn Rettinger, a 22-year-old from Ontario in Canada says it is a great way to see the world.

Fungi used in weed kill trials
Scientists are closer to understanding how native fungi can kill introduced weeds across northern Australia.
Trials in north Queensland have identified 10 varieties of fungi which have been causing dieback in parkinsonia, a weed which threatens 75 per cent of Australia's north.
Victor Galea from the University of Queensland says it is unusual to find a native organism that can be used as a cheap biological control agent.
"We suspect that a lot of these fungi which are in the soil are adapted to live in that situation and parkinsonia is not adapted so well," he said.

Wool price increases predicted
Some good news for the wool industry today, with analysts tipping good price increases in the second half of the year.
Retail demand is down in key markets like the United States and Japan, but economic conditions in most wool consuming countries are forecast to improve, which should see sales pick up.
With most Australian auction centres entering the winter recess, chief economist at Woolmark, Chris Wilcox, says confidence for the rest of the year is high.
"We would expect to see a similar price gain to what we've seen in the first six months," he said.
"It is a fairly positive outlook, in fact Woolmark business survey results, the last survey we did was the most positive we've seen in nearly five years. And I think we'll see more of that in the coming few months."
Meanwhile, the latest figures from Australian Wool Innovation show wool production is set to fall away in Western Australia by about 7 per cent over the next year, with a minor increase in the eastern states.
Although dry conditions are affecting most of the country, sheep numbers are not expected to decline any further.

Study shows more severe droughts ahead for Aust
New research into the sun suggests eastern Australia could face more severe droughts over the next 500 years.
A study at the University of New England in New South Wales has shown a link between solar cycles and rainfall patterns, which can be used in conjunction with the southern oscillation index to more accurately predict droughts.
Associate Professor Robert Baker says fewer sunspots or cold patches on the surface of the sun may mean the eastern states are headed for drier times in the long term.

Live export industry generating $1.8b a year
The live export industry is fighting back against animal rights activists with an industry backed survey released today detailing the part it plays in the national economy.
Live exports have been under attack from activists for some years and the Federal Government has banned exports to some Middle East countries following animal cruelty concerns.

Lamb exporter releases new contract conditions for producers
A major Western Australian lamb exporter admits it has taken a risky step by negotiating new contracts for the heavy lamb market in North America.
In recognition of the hard winter across the southern half of the state, meat marketing co-operative WAMMCO has released new contract conditions for producers, allowing for lambs two kilograms lighter.
Chief executive Des Griffiths says the main challenge is to help producers to continue selling their lambs, despite the lack of winter feed and also hold on to the lucrative export markets.
"In Western Australia particularly, we're at risk of losing it because in the eastern states if they have a reasonable season, the product is available out of there," he said.

US wheat futures jump
United States wheat futures jumped a further 3 per cent last night following growing concerns about their spring wheat crop.
Contracts on Chicago out until December 2008 have also jumped to nearly $US5.00 a bushel, well above the current spot price.
Dougal Hunter, from the Australian Stock Exchange, says this points to good domestic prices for the next three harvests.
"There's no doubt the higher prices out in the deferred months, particularly 2007 and 2008 for Chicago have presented selling opportunities both on swaps and on the ASX," he said.
"On the ASX at the moment the January contract for milling wheat settled at $218.

Cattlemen claim best season in years
Cattlemen south-west of Darwin are hailing their best season in years.
The heavy wet season has seen a growing number of cattle being fattened in the Douglas Daly region.
Producer Ian Mcbean says the conditions should see an increase in the number of cattle going into the territory's live export trade.
"It is definitely the best season I have ever seen in the 50 odd years I have been in the Territory, really good growing season," he said.

States look to align illegal fishing laws
Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory are looking at aligning their laws to tackle illegal fishing, as part of a joint effort to tackle the problem.
The Federal Government has also agreed to fund a pilot project, examining the role of Indigenous sea rangers in coastal surveillance.
But Peter Cassells, from International Fisheries, says ultimately there will not be a need for rangers to help because the Government wants to stop illegal fishermen before they reach Australian territorial waters.
"I mean in an ideal world illegal fishers will not get through to the coastal strips," he said.

Cherry growers urged to support levy increase
Cherry growers say they are facing a tough season, with a lack of overseas markets and a forecast heavy crop.
New fruit fly protocols in Taiwan have closed that market and growers cannot get fruit into China, the US or New Zealand.
The industry now wants to increase its levy from one to eight cents a kilogram to fund research and development, marketing and promotions.
Trevor Ranford from Cherry Growers Australia hopes most growers will support the changes.
Efforts have begun to tackle fruit fly outbreaks on a national basis for the first time.
In the past, controlling the pest has been left up the states, but the horticulture sector believes there needs to be a more coordinated approach.
Plant Health Australia spokesman Kyle Thoms says there will be a meeting in Canberra next month to kick off the effort.
"There's been a lot of good work done that's been done over many years across all of the states, but this is going to give us a chance, this national program, to bring all those players together," he said.

Conference to focus on sustainability of Indigenous communities
The future of remote Indigenous communities is in the spotlight at a national conference in Perth today.
Across Australia, 250 delegates will attend the conference to look at how to make the communities sustainable.
Doctor Martin Anda from Murdoch University says they will not be focusing on past failures, but looking for the success stories.
"[We will be] sharing ideas together on exactly how we might formulate some of these new ways forward to try bringing more life and sustainability to some of these far-flung communities," he said.

Kangaroo skin hits fashion capitals
Kangaroo skin is being promoted by designers and manufacturers in the fashion capitals of the world.
A company in Cairns which exports up to 18,000 skins every two months to processors in Spain, France and Italy says the skins are made into everything from clothing to footballs.
Exporter Ross Gates says the skin is proving popular because of its strength, repellent nature and pliability.
"Quite a number of the upmarket men's shoe manufacturers are starting to manufacturer their shoes from kangaroo," he said.

US researchers to grow crops on Mars
Researchers in the United States are running trials to see if crops can be grown on the planet Mars.
NASA plans to send astronauts to Mars to set up a planetary base, a mission which could last at least three years.
Researchers at the University of Florida are looking at which crops might be grown hydroponically on the shuttle during the trial and also in greenhouses on Mars to provide food for the astronauts.
Professor of food engineering Arthur Teixeira says results have been successful.
"I believe research is now available to show that we could probably rely on being able to grow certain varieties of rice, dry beans, soy beans and sweet potato," he said.

Mumbai train explosion behind gold price increase
The price of gold jumped $17 in New York overnight after a fatal train explosion ripped through the financial district of Mumbai in India.
Spot gold price settled at $US643.10 an ounce, $80 below its record high in May this year.

Instant TV messages to alert remote communities
If you are living in remote Australia in the future, instant messages with information from bushfire alerts to doctor visits could pop up on your television.
New research by the Desert Knowledge Cooperative Research Centre has shown that the TV is almost always switched on in remote communities and improved technology could make sure messages get through.
Dr Andrew Turk from Murdoch University says the technology would help to improve communication.
"From the results of our survey, TVs seem to be on pretty well all day, now whether people are watching them is another question," he said.
"But if we put a message as audio in Idigenous language, people pick up on that even if they're not watching the set and they realise that is something of interest to them, rather than just the general chatter in English.

Fuel prices changing rural lifestyles
High fuel prices are changing how rural families live, with some dropping children's sporting commitments and car pooling with neighbours.
The latest figures from the Bureau of Statistics show transport, food and groceries and recreation are the three biggest expenses for rural household budgets.
Queensland beef producer Georgie Somerset believes country people spend more on recreation because they are spending more time on the farm.
"Perhaps there's a sense there of 'well we'll go and do this while it's in town, or we'll take up the opportunity to go to a performance'," he said.
"If you're not going to get away from where you live then you may as well make the most of what you've got there and so yes I think there probably has been some more spending on things like a DVD machine and a decent TV because they're actually spending more weeks at home and less weeks away on holidays."
The New South Wales Irrigators Council says it will withdraw support for the National Water Initiative, unless the federal and state governments make radical changes.
The council's chief executive, Doug Miell, says the initiative is "off the rails" and will place a huge financial burden on farmers and rural communities.

PM asked to slow down water trading
Farmers in Victoria's Goulburn Valley have called on the Prime Minister to slow down the pace of water trading in order to stop it destroying local farms.
The Parliamentary Secretary responsible for water, Malcolm Turnbull, has met farmers in Shepparton.
They have told him they cannot compete for local water which is being sent down the Murray to irrigate vineyards and almond farms, and that they enjoy tax breaks through managed investment schemes (MIS).
Mr Turnbull says he will raise the issue with Mr Howard.
"I'll take back to the PM the concern that there is in the community, that the managed investment schemes have certain tax advantages," he said.

Rural property values plateau
Rural property values seem to have finally plateaued after rising by 70 per cent over the past five years.
Elders rural property expert John Peden says the softer market is more a correction than a direct result of drought or lower farm incomes.
With uncertainty over water allocations, Mr Peden says there is less confidence in the irrigation sector, although the beef industry continues to boom.
"There is normally a slowing in sales volume during the winter. We are experiencing that at the present time, possibly a little more than in previous years," he said.

Drought relief scheme extended
There is good news today for 25 per cent of drought-hit farmers who rely on off-farm work to maintain an income.
Last year the Federal Government relaxed aid rules, allowing primary producers to earn up to $41,000 without affecting their drought relief payments.

Mining company confident of copper deposit discovery
The directors of mining company, CuDeco, remain confident they have found one of Australia's biggest deposits of copper near Cloncurry in north-west Queensland.
The company, which until yesterday was known as Australian Mining Investments, hit the headlines after its share price jumped from 29 cents to a high of $10 in seven weeks.
Trading in shares are suspended pending an investigation by the Australian Stock Exchange.
Directors met to reassure more than 30 shareholders in Cloncurry yesterday about the accuracy of the company's exploration results.
CuDeco chairman Wayne McCrae thinks they are sitting on something big.
"We'll put a resource out of 59 million tonnes at 2 per cent and all the indications are [that] it just seems to be getting bigger," he said.

Wool quality and production on agenda of merino conference
Around 900 delegates from across the globe are in Perth today for the World Merino Conference.
Western Australian Farmers Federation spokesman Mike Norton says the latest developments in breeding and innovation, as well as wool quality and production, are on the agenda.
He says it is excellent news to have so many people from around the world to attend a conference in Western Australia.
"You really do get a different perspective of your industry from the speakers as they come around the world on what's happening," he said.

Frost damage blamed for drop in orange crop
South Australia's navel orange crop will be down by as much as 30,000 tonnes due to frost damage.
Industry officials say the crop could come in at between just 45,000 and 50,000 tonnes.
Other varieties including mandarins, lemons, tangelos and grape fruit have also suffered significant losses.
Citrus Crop Estimates Committee spokesman Kym Thiel says more damage could still appear.
"For some individuals there may be 100 per cent loss, for others it may only be a certain percentage," he said.

Italian company doubles Aust wool purchases
The wool industry is claiming a win, following news that Italian fashion giant Benetton will double its purchase of Australian wool over the next two years.
Last year, animal rights group People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ended a nine month campaign to pressure Benetton to boycott Australian wool, over its concerns about the practice of mulesing.

Ad blitz to counteract animal liberation group campaigns
Australia's peak livestock body is planning a national advertisting blitz to try to counter campaigns against the live export trade being run by animal liberation groups.
Meat and Livestock Australia says consumer attitudes to animal welfare are one of the biggest challenges facing the industry.
Meat and Livestock's chairman Don Heatley says the campaign, which is already running in Western Australia, explains how exporters are trying to improve welfare conditions for livestock.
"We intend over a period of time leading up over the next six months to actually roll that out on a national basis across Australia, so that the community understands what we do," he said.

Toxic weed could cost Qld millions
A new survey of a toxic weed is expected to show it is costing the Queensland livestock sector tens of millions of dollars in stock losses.
Agforce and the Department of Primary Industries have just launched a landholder survey of pimelea which has resurged because of dry conditions in the western Darling Downs.
The survey will be used to attact research funding to help landholders who do not have any way of curing affected stock.

Investment needed to control buffel grass: expert
Control of the introduced pasture buffel grass is proving a major challenge across central Australian parks.
For the past 12 years, Sydney University students have assisted Finke Gorge National Park rangers, south-west of Alice Springs.
The control work involves hot fires and a new soil sterilant.
An anonymous trust funds the majority of the work, but Professor Lester Burgess from the Faculty of Agriculture says there needs to be continual investment.
The overall program costs $10,000 each year.
"The buffel grass is continuing to increase slowly overall in the park, but I think we have been quite successful in slowing it in some areas, no more than about 50 hectares and we have reasonably good control over a further 250 to 500 hectares," he said.

Coal project to speed up approval
A new coal project in central Queensland will receive help to speed up the Federal Government approval process.
The Sonoma Coal Project near Collinsville has been elevated to national significance status, which means government agencies will provide support to cut down red tape.

Fruit picking not for everyone, says grower
Single parents, the long-term unemployed, older people and some disability pensioners could all be forced to pick fruit under the Federal Government's new welfare-to-work program.
Under the guidelines, anyone living within 90 minutes of a harvest area can be eligible for fruit picking.
Victorian grower Michael Tripodi says extra workers are welcome, but not everyone is cut out for the job.
"To come out on an orchard we have to see value for money in our employees also. It's a bit hard for us to put someone on that won't work as hard as we expect them to work," he said.
"We're starting at daybreak and we'll probably try and push through until two o'clock, once it gets to 40, 42-43 degrees it's bloody hot up here.

Stakeholders discuss quarantine concerns
A top-level meeting is today discussing how Australia's quarantine system can be improved.
About 60 government and industry delegates have gathered in Canberra to examine a range of concerns.
The National Farmers Federation (NFF), which is facilitating the meeting, says the relationship between AQIS and Biosecurity Australia could be improved to ensure Australia's competitive advantage in agriculture.
While some stakeholders such as the New South Wales Farmers Association have expressed a need to combine the two quarantine authorities, NFF president David Crombie says that is unnecessary.
"I think the really important thing is to make sure that we have the right people sitting around the table when we're putting probabilities on the likelihood of occurrence and we have the right people sitting around the table - and I include industry in that - of assessing what the likely consequence is," he said.
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says the Federal Government has dropped its defences to ensure an open and frank assessment of the system.
"It will be a free-wheeling discussion and there will be different points of view because not all of the many organisations present share entirely the same approach," he said.

European snail found in Launceston
A European snail has been found in Australia, discovered on the outside of grain containers in Launceston in northern Tasmania.
Known as white snails, they arrived on containers of lupins from Western Australia.
Danny Reardon from Quarantine Tasmania says the situation was dealt with quickly and he defends quarantine officers at the port of Fremantle, through which the snails apparently passed undetected.
"When you come to think about it, there's hundreds of thousands of containers coming into the country and there's always a possibility that things will get through the barrier," he said.
"It all depends on what stage the snails were at when they come in. They could've been in the form of eggs, they may not have been developed, they could have developed during the storage process there.

Scant rainfall dashes farmers' hopes
A forecast of heavy rain has ended in disappointment for South Australia's northern pastoralists.
The weather bureau was predicting falls of up to 40 millimetres in some parts, but most properties got less than 20.
Tony Williams from Mt Barry Station near Oodnadatta says it was an anti-climax.
"There was a big build up to this one ... but it was a bit of fizzer, there were good falls north of Oodnadatta, handy falls, but south down our way we only had nine millimetres - so very disappointing, really," he said.
"It's been eight months since we've had a decent fall.
"Around 30 millimetres would have been nice but maybe next time."
Meanwhile, grain farmers in north-west Victoria are hoping the weather bureau's prediction of rain this weekend is accurate.
There is no subsoil moisture on some farms at Ouyen, some farmers have given up on sowing crops, while others have significantly revised their plans.
Farmer Dean Munro is not sure what is in store for the crop he planted eight weeks ago.
"The stuff that we did sow only about 20 or 30 per cent has actually come up, the rest of it is still in the ground, things are looking pretty grim," he said.
"This weekend's probably the last roll of the dice for this crop I'd say.
"If we don't get substantial rain this weekend it's certainly in a fair bit of trouble."
But pastoralists in the Northern Territory have fared much better.
Every district received falls in the past 24 hours.
In the Alice Springs district, most communities and stations received between 10 and 20 millimetres, with 54 millimetres recorded at Hamilton Downs Station.

Uranium drilling draws positive results
Australia's next uranium mine could be north-west of Alice Springs in central Australia.
Deep Yellow, a Western Australian uranium exploration company, released positive results this week from its exploration drilling at Napperby Station, 150 kilometres from Alice Springs.
Stockbroker Matthew Baker says that at just under half a pound per tonne reported it could be economic.
"It's still very early stage but if you're looking at uranium companies, to me the angle is quite simple," he said.
"You look at them and say 'well I want one in the Territory because it doesn't matter what the Government here says'.

ASX investigates junior mining company
A second junior mining company, Frontier Resources, has come under the scrutiny of the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX) after it released exploration results that doubled its share price.
Shares in Queensland copper explorer Cudeco remain in a trading halt, pending an investigation into drill results.
One of the caveats on explorers releasing information to the market is that results must meet the standards of the joint ore reserve code.
Don Larkin, from the Australian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, says geologists can be suspended for releasing misleading results to shareholders.
"If there is a breach of the code or if there is some questions on the code the ASX will ask questions behind the scenes," he said.

Wool estimates 'ambitious'
Elders national manager of wool says wool production forecasts released this week are overly ambitious.
Australian WooI Innovation has predicted shorn wool production in Australia to stay relatively stable in the coming year, with production tipped to increase slightly in the eastern states, but fall in Western Australia.

Dam task force chief meets locals
Former Queensland governor Major General Peter Arnison has begun meetings and inspections as head of south-east Queensland's dam task force.
Plans for a dam in the Mary Valley, south of Gympie, will see more than 500 properties resumed and a smaller dam has been proposed for Wyaralong on the Logan River.
Visiting the Mary River site yesterday, Maj Gen Arnison listened to local concerns and was open to having more people on the task orce.
"We're about trying to get the broadest possible understanding of what the issues are," he said.
"I think in terms of the second phase of this which is looking for a much better, brighter economic and social future for the Mary Valley and Cooloola Shire.

SAFF sells building to pay debts
The South Australian Farmers Federation (SAFF) is putting its Adelaide headquarters on the market to try to pay off its debts.
SAFF has been in financial strife for a number of years and falling membership numbers have made it difficult to stay afloat.
General manager Carol Vincent says the sale of the building will put SAFF back on track.
"The sale of the building will fix the whole thing, it'll pay off the debt," she said.
"They'll have enough money to buy another building and a number of hundreds of thousands of dollars left to invest in whatever way they see fit to give them reserves.

NT banana growers cashing in on prices
Banana growers in the Northern Territory are continuing to receive record prices following the destruction of major plantations by cyclone Larry.
The Territory's largest grower also operates in north Queensland and the Darwin farm has been a lifeline for the business.
Farm manager Mark Smith says the Territory still has the cheapest bananas in the nation.
"Up until the cyclone we would lose money sending fruit down south. The local market has kept us afloat," he said.
"The cheapest bananas in Australia are in Darwin at the moment, so it looks like the prices are up at around $15 per kilogram elsewhere in the southern states.

Olive leaves show cancer-killing potential
Laboratory tests of an extract from olive leaves have shown it can kill prostate and breast cancer cells.
Southern Cross University researchers on the north coast of New South Wales completed the work for a manufacturer of the extract.
The university's Dr Lesley Stevensen says the results sound remarkable, but need to be considered in context.
She says clinical trials are needed to test the lab theory.
"The effects that we found were lethal in that they would actually kill the cells if you like," she said.

Science in the paddock wins award for school
An isolated high school in north-west Tasmania has gained national recognition for taking science classes to the farm paddock.
Smithton High beat 22 other entries to win this year's Australian Rural Education Award.
Science students tested local soil and water quality and then reported back to local wool company Woolnorth.
Assistant principal Susan Wigg says local farmers are now lining up for help from the students.
"We are most certainly thrilled to win the award and I'm sure that the community will be proud that we have won this award," she said.

Toowoomba ratepayers to vote on drinking recycled water
As the water crisis in south-east Queensland continues, the ratepayers of Toowoomba will vote on whether they are prepared to drink recycled water.
Toowoomba Mayor Di Thorley says the referendum is the first of its type and is a condition of Commonwealth funding.
"It was not our idea I can assure you," she said.

AWB seeks to confidential protect documents
Monopoly wheat exporter AWB is trying to stop the oil-for-food inquiry accessing more than 1,300 confidential documents it says are protected by legal privilege.
Barrister Melissa Perry told the Federal Court AWB's privilege claim has risen since May, when it first submitted its list of secret documents.
AWB is arguing that the new amendment to the Royal Commissions Act allowing Commissioner Terence Cole to inspect the confidential documents is unconstitutional and will cause the head of the Cole Inquiry to be in contempt if he examines them.

Rural health professions hail agreement
Rural health professionals say a new agreement between the states and the Federal Government will go a long way towards fixing the shortage of doctors in country areas.
An extra 200 medical school places, funding for rural medical schools and a new system of training that includes stints in regional areas are just some of the proposals put forward.
Rural medicine will be recognised in its own right and there will be a national action plan for mental health.
Head of Melbourne University's rural medical school, Dawn deWitt, says while getting extra student places is a great achievement the hard work now is getting the teachers.
"How we are going to work through this issue of asking an already short workforce to teach a huge number of additional new students is going to be the trick," she said.
The Rural Doctors Association says it is not clear how many of the new medical school places will be bonded but it hopes they will include living allowances and other incentives.

Russia to open up beef export market
Russia will open up its beef export market to international bidders due to a shortage of beef from the European Union.
About 230,000 tonnes of beef is needed to fill the Russian quota, with Brazil and Australia considered to be the big contenders.
Prices for beef in Russia have jumped 40 per cent since the beginning of the year.
Andrew MacCallum from Meat and Livestock Australia says it is a significant new market and should keep international beef prices buoyant.

7th mad cow disease case detected in Canada
The seventh case of BSE or mad cow disease has been detected in Canada.

NZ butter suspended from Europe
The world dairy market looks set to further weaken after the suspension of New Zealand butter from Europe.
The European Court of Justice made the ruling after a German company challenged New Zealand's import licence.
New Zealand's exports to Europe make up about 15 per cent of the total world butter trade.
Rabobank dairy analyst Tim Hunt says Australian farmers will feel the effects.
"Fonterra and the New Zealand Government are working hard to reverse the decision but if the issue is not resolved and trade resumed within four to six months we're going to have a lot of butter looking for a new home on the global market," he said.

Name change for sherry, port labels
Australia's wine industry will no longer use sherry or port on their labels to try to gain better access to the European market.
Under an agreement to phase out the use of traditional European wine terms, port will become Australian tawny, while vintage port will be known as Australian vintage.
Sam Tolley from the Wine and Brandy Corporation says it will mean more freedom.
"We've been able to use this as a bargaining chip to get better access to the marketplace," he said.

Pulp mill integrated impact statement released
Timber company Gunns has released an integrated impact statement for its proposed pulp mill at Bells Bay in northern Tasmania.
The company says the $1.4 billion project will create 4,000 jobs during construction and add hundreds of millions of dollars to the value of export woodchips.
Environmental groups are worried the mill could result in more logging in native forests, although that has been rejected by project manager Les Baker.
"Not one tree will be cut down or one tree planted as a result of this project," he said.
"It simply transfers 60 per cent of Gunns export chips [that otherwise go to Asia] where its value added to a pulp mill in Tasmania.
"Woodchips are sold for about $90 a tonne where as pulp is sold for approximately $800 a tonne so it's a terrific value adding project."

Indigenous communities urged to take better care of dogs
With animal numbers on the rise in remote communities, Indigenous communities are being urged to take better care of their dogs to help improve their own health.
A national dog conference in Darwin today is trying to unite Indigenous families and reduce livestock losses.
Community leaders, vets and health workers have come together to share ideas, including the development of shared responsibility agreements to attract funding.
Dr Mark Lawrie from the RSPCA says that might help in a range of ways.
"I guess there's another over-arching thing that we're looking at at this conference too and that's the concept of the linkage between violence to animals and people," he said.

Giant pumpkins attract tourists
Giant pumpkins were a major attraction at the weekend's Kununurra Agricultural Show in Western Australia's far north.
Just under 5,000 people came to see the Ord Valley's produce, including tourists travelling across Australia's north.
Two pumpkins tied for the title as the show's biggest, weighing in at 55.9 kilograms.
The oversized vegetables caught most by surprise, including Gumi from Osaka, Japan.

Rain band saves crops in south-east
There are plenty of smiles over south-eastern Australia today after the first decent rain in months.
A big band of rain from central Queensland to southern Victoria has saved crops and put some water back in tanks and dams.

NSW
Farmers in the central cropping belt of New South Wales had a short-term reprieve, with falls of between 20 and 30 millimetres ensuring the survival of winter wheat crops.
But the best falls were in the northern and far western regions, with the top total of 60 millimetres recorded at Louth, west of Bourke.
Local grazier Wally Mitchell says it is great.
"This has been a magnificent rain change. Many of us have been pushing scrub, feeding cotton seed, keeping our breeders alive and some of us had even had a big punt, and joined, so the little lambs are just coming on the ground here and this will really turn the job around for us," he said.
Parts of Victoria were luckier than others, with talkback callers to the ABC reporting falls of up to 60 millimetres in the state's north.

SA
In South Australia, widespread rain is expected to keep the state's harvest on track for a bumper season.
The top readings was at Maralinga in the far west with 65 millimetres, but while most farmers are saying it is the most significant rain they've received all year, others missed out.
Rodney Lush from Coombe in the upper south-east was pinning his hopes on a good rain after suffering a dry June and heavy frosts.
"It hasn't been heavy rain, it's barely been drizzle a lot of the time, it's only made things damp, it certainly hasn't wetted things, barely enough to get my pasture growth going again and it's certainly not enough let us go sowing lucerne with any confidence," he said.

Qld
In Queensland there were some good falls in the parched west and south-west, but little rain fell in the south-east, where dam levels are at critical levels.
Quilpie grazier Brian Rutledge says the 60 millimetres in his rain gauge is the best in six years.
But Mr Rutledge says much more is needed if the region is to recover from drought and lose its title of "heartbreak corner".
"It has been dubbed heartbreak corner in the years gone by and it is certainly living up to its name," he said.

AWEX in backflip on auction room decision
Australian Wool Exchange (AWEX) has reversed its decision to give up its auction rooms in Sydney and Melbourne.
AWEX had wanted wool brokers to take over the Yennora and Brooklyn sites by the end of the year.
The move was not supported by exporters or Sydney-based brokers, but Melbourne broker Don Fraser says it was vital to keep the auction rooms open.
"Our focus is on ensuring that our clients have a continuous selling arrangement for their wool," he said.
"Should AWEX have decided not to go ahead, we would then have taken the lease back after all the brokers did set up 691 Geelong Road.
"The arrangement will be as it has been in the past, which is a one year lease with a one year option."

Copper explorer's shares halved
Investors stripped almost $200 million from the value of Queensland copper explorer Cudeco Limited yesterday after it reclassified the size of its Rocklands deposits near Cloncurry.
The company was held in a trading halt for 12 days while the Australian Stock Exchange queried initial exploration work details released to the market.
Yesterday Cudeco was forced to halve the size of the deposit because original estimates did not follow market standards.
Shares in Cudeco, formerly known as Australian Mining Investments, were also slashed by half, finishing yesterday's trade at $3.56.
Hartley's resource expert Rob Brierley says it is a timely warning for shareholders in speculative exploration stocks.
"Certainly it's a touch of reality for Australian Mining Investments, it obviously got a little bit over excited," Mr Brierley said.
"It's by no means the end of the road, but it's probably a little lesson that sometimes you need to prove these things up in a little more detail."
A number of investors in Cudeco have contacted law firm Slater and Gordon about their losses.

Farmers set to be compensated for vitamin price fixing
Eligible farmers, feedlotters and feed suppliers are set to be compensated over the vitamin price fixing scandal of the 1990s.
Australia's first class action against a price fixing cartel has been settled with three major pharmaceutical companies agreeing to pay more than $30 million in compensation and more than $10 million in legal fees.
The settlement still needs to be endorsed by the Federal Court.
Lawyer Kim Parker from Maurice Blackburn Cashman says it is a breakthrough case.
"It was issued as a result of a global cartel being exposed in relation to vitamin products manufactured by a number of different vitamin, pharmaceutical companies including Roche, BASF and Aventis," Ms Parker said.

Banana industry expected to regain full strength by Xmas
Bananas from trees which escaped the full force of cyclone Larry in north Queensland earlier this year will begin arriving on supermarket shelves as early as September.
The price of the fruit has skyrocketed with most of the crop wiped out during the cyclone.
Craig Allen from the Banana Industry Promotions Company expects the industry to be back to full strength by Christmas.
"The response to the news has been great because banana ticket prices have been at absolute record levels," Mr Allen said.

Looming lettuce shortage prompts grower to buy new farm
With a looming shortage of lettuces due to water restrictions near Melbourne, one of Australia's largest growers has been forced to buy land in another part of Victoria.
Water allocations have been severely slashed in the Bacchus Marsh district due to low storage levels.
Frank Ruffo from National Fresh Salads has now bought a farm near Swan Hill, on the Murray River, to obtain more secure water allocations.
"This is probably the first time in history that Bacchus Marsh has been so severely hit, prior to that we haven't really had a great problem with water," Mr Ruffo said.

Tuna industry welcomes poaching report
A report that Japanese fishermen may have illegally caught more than $5 billion in tuna over the past 20 years has been welcomed by the Australian industry.
The report by the International Commission for the Conservation of Bluefin Tuna found that about 8,500 tonnes of tuna are being poached each year.
Brian Jeffriess from the Tuna Boat Owners Association says while illegal fishing has cost them income, the figures show there is more tuna in the wild than previously thought.
"That's a large loss of income over the last 20 years, if the report is correct," Mr Jeffriess said.
"That's a worrying situation.
"Strangely enough, if indeed it's true, then it shows the stock in a much stronger condition.
"The way the science works is in fact that the more that has been caught, the more productive the stock is.

WTO makes last effort to save trade talks
A last ditch effort has begun at the G8 summit in St Petersburg to save the Doha round of world trade talks.
World Trade Organisation (WTO) director-general Pascal Lamy has been in confidential talks with key countries including Australia, the United States and the European Union to discover their final positions on farm trade reform.

Sleeping disorders among mining workers on the rise
With the Western Australian mining industry continuing to boom, the number of shift workers suffering sleep disorders is growing.
Mining companies are operating 24 hours a day and the experts say many workers do not get enough sleep between shifts.
Dr David Hillman, from the Sir Charles Gardiner Hospital in Perth, says he is treating a large number of shift workers and there are safety concerns which must be addressed by mining companies.
"First of all there's a decrease in alertness levels, secondly our reaction times get slower," Dr Hillman said.
"Mood and memory are adversely affected, it just makes us under perform so we become safety risks amongst other things.
"It really is a massive issue for the Pilbara.

Hay balers fail to meet safety standards: survey
It is farm safety week and hay balers are the latest equipment to come in for some attention.
A recent survey by the Kondinin Group found two commonly-used hay balers failed to meet industry safety requirements.
Engineer Josh Guimelli says farmers should be wary when purchasing new equipment.
"A couple of the machines actually didn't have an upper walkway railing which, on a baler - large square baler - is quite a mission because they're rather high off the ground," Mr Guimelli said.

Researchers developing vaccine for de-sexing dogs
De-sexing dogs in the future may just involve a quick vaccination.
Researchers are developing non-surgical ways to control breeding without surgery.
Professor Henry Baker from Auburn University, in the United States, is visiting Australia and believes the emerging technology could help solve animal problems in remote Indigenous communities.
"[It involves] chemical sterilisation, injections into the reproductive organs to cause their destruction and vaccines," Professor Baker said.
"Most people think of vaccines with respect to controlling infectious diseases, but now vaccines have a new role to treat non-infectious diseases.
"In my country direct injection into the testes of dogs [is showing the most promise].
"That's a registered product.

Court decision looms over AWB documents case
Wheat exporter AWB will know this afternoon if the Federal Court will hear its case to keep 1,300 secret documents from the oil-for-food inquiry.
The company has claimed legal privilege over the material, saying it represents confidential advice and should not be seen by Commissioner Terence Cole.
AWB claims disclosure of over 1,300 documents will expose the company to irreparable harm, even though the Federal Government amended legislation last month giving Commissioner Cole the power to see the secret material.
AWB says the new law is unconstitutional and Commissioner Cole will be in contempt if he uses it.
The wheat exporter wants the Federal Court to impose a permanent injunction restraining the Commissioner from inspecting the documents.
Justice Neil Young will decide this afternoon if the court will intervene to hear the matter.
Meanwhile farmers in New South Wales have voted to continue their support for the single desk for wheat exports after a vigorous debate.
With the findings of the Cole inquiry into AWB still pending, farmers stated their support for the single desk while calling for better controls.
A motion was carried calling for improved corporate governance within AWB and better transparency between AWB and its export arm AWB International.

Nut growers look to overseas markets
Macadamia nut growers are looking offshore for markets for their near record production levels.
With falling consumer demand here in Australia, growers are taking advantage of reduced tariffs for value-added products which were introduced as part of the United States Free Trade Agreement.
Jim Twentyman from Suncoast Gold Macadamias in south-east Queensland says tariffs will be reduced to zero by 2008.
"At the moment, because of the duty reason, we're having to have that packed and processed in the USA so we believe from next year we'll be able to do the packaging and processing in Australia," he said.

Dried fruits industry to take on snack foods sector
The dried fruit industry says it will tackle the snack foods market in an effort to counter the growing competition from cheap imports.
Growers and processors say they cannot compete with the cost of production in Turkey and Iran to supply the lower end of the market.
Peter Jones from the Australian Dried Fruits Association says it is tough to get space on the supermarket shelves, but there is consumer demand for healthier alternatives to chocolate bars and chips.
"Traditionally we've always been looked at as being an ingredient in fruit cakes and breakfast cereals, so really we've got to go to the snacking market," he said.

Australia bags rice deal to supply South Korea
Australia has negotiated a deal to supply rice to South Korea.
The quota is for more than 9,000 tonnes of white rice each year for the next decade.

Sheep producers urged to make 'bare bum' check
Sheep producers are being urged to check for signs of 'bare bum' sheep in their flocks, because new research shows the trait is more widespread than first thought.
The condition, where the breech of the animal is bare of wool and has less wrinkles than other merinos, was found on South Australia's Eyre Peninsula last year.
Australian Wool Innovation has been researching the trait to find out if it can be passed on, and whether it could be an alternative to mulesing.
