Port Fairy's Southern Ocean Mariculture voluntarily destocked three million abalone to prevent the disease spreading.
The company says tests during the past six weeks have shown the farm is now free of the virus.
General manager Mark Jervis says an application to move stock back onto the farm needs to be approved by the Victorian Government

Old wives' tale confirmed, milk helps people sleep
If you have had a few sleepless nights over the continuing dry weather try a warm glass of milk before bed.
A Dutch study has found that the amino acids found in milk not only make for a better night's sleep, but also activate a hormone in the brain that makes people more active in the morning.
Dairy Australia dietitian Maree Garside says it is really confirming what many have known for a long time.
"They're suggesting that being alert in the morning may be due to a good night's sleep and this serotonin, that's produced in the brain is sort of helped along by having tryptophan in your food such as a glass of milk," she said.
"This is I guess a bit of research to back up something that we may have known for a while."
Meanwhile, Victorian scientists have found that the amount of feed a dairy cow eats does not affect its ability to withstand a longer lactation period.
Researchers believe extended lactation can makes cow healthier and give farmers better cash flow.
Dr Martin Auldist, from the Victorian Primary Industries Department, says the finding that no extra feed needs to be bought to sustain a longer lactation came as a big surprise.

Possibilities for GM cotton raised at conference
Northern Australian irrigators and researchers have not given up on genetically modified cotton.
The crop has been excluded from the Ord Valley, by the Western Australian Government, and is banned in the Northern Territory.
But growers attending a national irrigation conference in Darwin want to plant it.
Researcher John Moulden says trials have proven GM cotton uses less water than existing Ord Valley crops like sugar cane and bananas.
"We are not advocating cotton as the be all and end all for the Ord, it's just one of the options we feel farmers in the Ord really need and deserve," he said.
"There's no scientific or environmental reason why GM cotton shouldn't be grown in northern Australia - the issues have been extensively addressed.

Govt unveils quarantine changes
The Federal Government says changes to Australia's quarantine system, announced today, will streamline assessment of imports.
The Agriculture Minister, Peter McGauran, says quarantine risk assessment processes will be strengthened by more scientific scrutiny, as well as improved and earlier consultation with importers and farmers.

Transporter's business booms as farmers send stock to Tas
Desperate Victorian dairy farmers are sending their stock to Tasmania.
One of Tasmania's biggest livestock carting contractors, Page Transport, is bringing up to 40 loads of cattle a week from Victoria, including some dairy cows still in milk, to be agisted on the north-west coast.
The company's operations manager, Chris Page, says it is an unfortunate consequence of the drought that his business is flat out.
"The transport industry in Tasmania will be busier through a drought, which like it or not that's our stance on it, but it is an awful thing," he said.

Pool arrangements 'don't secure' growers
The Grains Council of Australia says new trust arrangements for the national pool, which make AWB Limited the sole beneficiary of the trust, will not protect the financial interests of growers.
AWB National Pool Trust Pty Limited has been set up to quarantine the liabilities of each pool within that national pool, starting with this financial year.
But Grains Council chairman Murray Jones says the arrangement does nothing to change the status of growers from unsecured to secured creditors.
"Our legal advice is telling us that because they've made AWB Limited a beneficiary of the trust then that doesn't really achieve what we aimed to do, which was to ensure the growers and the pool participants were the secured creditors," he said.
"Growers today are really focussed on how serious the drought is. They are really doing it tough, and we need to do whatever we can to preserve their equity in this current pool."
But the chairman of AWB International, Ian Donges, says the Grains Council has got it all wrong about the new trust.
He says growers will enjoy more financial security, not less.
"The reason we went down the trust path is that we wanted to give pool participants additional protection against any unforeseen liabilities," he said.

Coalition split over AWB's single desk
The Deputy Prime Minister, Mark Vaile, says a split between Coalition MPs, on whether the single desk wheat export system should be scrapped, is just a symptom of a healthy debate.
In the wake of Cole inquiry evidence about AWB kickbacks to Iraq, up to six MPs including Wilson Tuckey, have called for the end of the single desk.
But Nationals members, including Senator Barnaby Joyce, say it must be maintained.
Mr Vaile says the Government is considering all the views of MPs and Senators, along with wheat grower groups.
"We really do need to wait until Cole reports, which is about a month away, and have a look at what the recommendations are and what the outcome of the inquiry is and how that affects the whole structure," he said.
"We don't want to be making decisions that may be seen as knee-jerk reactions and then have to go through another set of changes if there are particular recommendations coming out of Cole."
Liberal Senator Bill Heffernan says that, while he supports a single desk, it is debatable whether AWB is the best company to run it.

Natural Resources defends water cutbacks
The NSW Department of Natural Resources has defended the way it cut back water allocations to 80 per cent for Murray Valley Irrigators. The announcement on Sunday shocked many farmers because it came without warning. Executive director for water management David Harriss explains it has been a complex issue to work through. He claims they could not flag the cut in entitlement to irrigators because it would have breached commercial confidence. The reductions will apply only to water still in users' accounts, and aren't calculated on the full entitlement.

Abalone farm 
A Port Fairy abalone farm has been working hard to get its business back on track after being affected by the abalone virus that affected the south-west earlier this year. Southern Ocean Mariculture voluntarily destocked to prevent the disease spreading further and now has no commercial stock on the farm. The company has been running a sentinel trial for the last six weeks to see if there are still any diseases outside the water of the farm and the results have come back negative. Sarah Farnsworth caught up with general manager Mark Jervis to find out what process is now taking place so the farm can be restocked.

Fishing licence buyback scheme will secure industry's future: Abetz
The federal Minister for Fisheries, Eric Abetz, says he is confident the Government's fishing licence buyback scheme will secure the industry's future, despite continued illegal fishing in Australian waters.
He is particularly encouraging Bass Strait scallop fishers and northern prawn fishers to apply to have their licences bought out in the second round opening later this month after most of their tenders were unsuccessful.
Senator Abetz says significant successes are being made in stopping illegal fishing.
"I think we are slowly but surely getting on top of illegal fishing," he said.
"In northern Tasmania, as the time we speak now we've caught 308 vessels this calendar year.

Greens call for climate change inquiry
The Greens are calling on the Federal Government to establish a Senate inquiry into the implications of climate change for the future of Australian agriculture.
The party says climate change could profoundly affect rural communities and is vital to get a clear picture of what steps can be taken now to minimise the impact.
The chair of the Senate's rural and regional affairs committee, Senator Bill Hefferenan, has indicated he will take the Greens proposal to his Liberal partyroom.
Greens Senator Rachel Siewert is hopeful there will be enough support for an inquiry.
"We also want to look at what we can do about it, what are the adaptation strategies needed to deal with these impacts on our rural communities to ensure that they are viable," he said.

Unsold sheep to be taken to the tip
Sheep could be buried in a pit if they are not sold at a South Australian livestock market.
Prices for older sheep are plummeting in the saleyards, with a lack of buyers during the drought.
One of the state's biggest saleyards, Naracoorte, has drawn up contingency plans. Any unsold sheep will be placed in a pit at the local tip.
Denis Hovenden from the Naracoorte Lucindale Council says stock agents and the council are trying to prevent unsaleable sheep from coming into the yards. But under the current regulations, stock cannot be returned to their owners if they are not sold.
He says no one wants to put the plan into action, but there is very little choice.
"At this stage it is very much an unknown," he said.

Compo for Murray Valley irrigators ruled out
The New South Wales Government has ruled out compensation for Murray Valley irrigators affected by water cut backs.
High security allocations and carry over water in the Murray Valley have been cut by 20 per cent because of record low inflows.
The Natural Resources Minister, Ian Macdonald, says the water will be paid back in future, so there is no need for compensation.
He says more measures to help the farming community will be announced in the next fortnight.

Drought dominates National Field Days
New and innovative ways of coping with the drought are the most popular exhibits at this year's National Field Days, currently under way at Orange in central-western New South Wales.
Amazingly, the long-running drought has not dampened the spirits of those attending the National Field Days at Borenore.
It is the oldest field days in Australia, running for 55 years.
Organisers say exhibitor numbers and attendance levels are very similar to last year, with 30,000 expected through the sun-drenched gates to the parched earth of the Field Days site.
The hot topics being debated in forums there include managing the risk of climate change.

Graincorp backs call for end to AWB wheat export monopoly
One of the nation's biggest private grain traders has backed calls for AWB to lose its monopoly for wheat exports.
Western Australian Liberal MP Wilson Tuckey is spearheading a campaign to dismantle the single desk for wheat exports, in response to speculation that AWB will make significant trading losses this season.
Tom Keene, managing director of Graincorp, will not directly criticise AWB. But he says growers would do better if other companies were allowed to trade in export wheat.
"It would be wrong of me to comment on the AWB's hedging arrangements," he said.
"My reaction has been and continues to be that a marketplace that has more competition in it would ensure that growers could choose who they sell their grain to, just as they currently do with their other grains.

Ecuador hopeful banana import ban will be lifted
Ecuador and other banana exporting countries are hopeful the ban on Australia importing bananas from the Philippines will be overturned before the end of the year.
The Australian Banana Growers Council says Biosecurity Australia has changed its position on the issue several times, but it must take account of the dangers of Moko disease in its current import risk analysis.
Ecuador's Ambassador Antonio Rodas Posso says if Filipino imports get approved, it will make the application process easier for other countries.
"We have heard that you right now, the Australians, are making research on another kind of banana from another country," he said.

Incidence of breast cancer higher in rural women: UK study
A British study has found that rural women are three times more likely to suffer from breast cancer.
But Australian researchers say this contradicts with their findings, which indicate the incidence of breast cancer is highest in cities.
John Harding, head of the health register and cancer monitoring unit at the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, says the statistics show that women in remote Indigenous communities have the lowest incidence of breast cancer.
"There is a protective effect for breast cancer for women who have children earlier and then breast feed for long periods of time," he said.

Cherry research, development levy increases
Australia's cherry growers have voted to increase their research and development levy by three cents.
They will now contribute four cents per kilogram, with the industry expecting to raise about $280,000 a year.
The secretary of the Cherry Growers Association, Trevor Ranford, says the rise is long overdue.

Cattle, sheep export deaths rise
The numbers of cattle and sheep deaths in export shipments has risen slightly in the first six months of this year, compared to the same period last year.
Department of Agriculture reports tabled in the Senate say cattle deaths rose from 1.3 in 1,000 to 1.4.
Sheep deaths rose from six in 1,000 to eight.
Deaths of goats rose from 11 in 1,000 to 13.
But the federal Agriculture Minister, Peter McGauran, says animal management measures at ports and on live export ships have improved dramatically.
"Especially the inspections at the feedlot and also before the stock board the ship, in transit where there's a requirement for a vet, reporting daily back to AQIS, with the oversight of an experienced stockman, the improved feed and watering systems [and] the best ships in the world," he said.

Uranium industry heavily regulated: ERA chief
The head of the Ranger uranium mine in the Northern Territory says new entrants to the uranium industry should prepare themselves for zealous government regulation.
Harry Kenyon-Slaney, the CEO of Energy Resources Australia (ERA) which runs Ranger, says his mine is one of the most stringently regulated in the world.
He says the red tape comes at a price and is definitely not for mining companies who want to cut corners.
"Frankly, uranium mining is just like any other mining," he said.
"It has some specific issues that need to be managed, just as ... other different mining operations do.

Drought may affect dairy foods supply, exporter says
A Victorian-based exporter and processor of dairy foods has told a conference in Sydney that Japan is concerned about Australia's capacity to ensure long-term supply because of the drought.
Burra Foods says Australia exports nearly $23 billion of food and beverages a year, with Japan taking 20 per cent of that.
But chief executive Grant Crothers says while Japan has been a loyal customer of Australia for two decades, it is now worried about the continuing dry conditions.
"Security of supply for any country that can't feed themselves is a big issue and their self-sufficiency on food is down to about 40 per cent and they know they need to buy food outside Japan," he said.

Senate committee backs guest worker scheme rejection
A Senate inquiry has rejected farmers' arguments that Pacific islands guest workers should be allowed in to ease a national shortage of harvest labour.
The Senate committee's report supports the Federal Government's view that a new visa is not needed for seasonal farm workers.
Inquiry chairwoman Judith Troeth says extensive hearings suggested farmers could find Australian harvest labour if they paid better wages and offered adequate working conditions and accommodation.
"The guarantees that we were given that there would be suitable accommodation and enough work for labourers coming in Australia - the confidence there was probably misplaced," the Victorian Liberal Senator said.
"Experienced pickers who are Australian told us that it is often quite difficult to get a good wage on the present piece rate that exists."
The body representing fruit and vegetable growers in north-west Australia is furious about the inquiry's findings.
David McKerrell from the Kimberley Primary Industries Association says it is not pay and conditions that are putting workers off in Kununurra in north-west Western Australia, it is the heat.
He says many farmers in the district already pay above award wages but it is not helping.
Mr McKerrell wants the Federal Government to make exceptions to allow Pacific Islanders to work in hotter climates like the Kimberley.
"Up in Kununurra at present, when it's 38 degrees everyday, it's not pleasant working," he said.
"And if these people were around that Senator Troth says there are, surely they would be here.
"There's mangoes here dropping on the ground.
"There's no one available and they're not here, and the reason they're not here is because it's too hot.
"They're not acclimatised to it and that's the end of the story."
Isis Shire Mayor Bill Trevor gave evidence to the Senate Committee when it visited Queensland's fruit and vegetable growing Bundaberg and Childers region early this year.
He says the inquiry has hardly looked at the many barriers that farmers face in getting workers.
"There is a need within the farming community to be able to access labour and it's very, very difficult at times, especially in peak production periods, for farmers to pick up that extra labour," he said.
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) has launched a national advertising campaign to lift domestic beef sales by $300 million over the next three years.
The $2.8 million promotion will involve television, radio, newspaper and magazine advertisements starting from this Sunday.
MLA spokesman David Palmer says it has been seven years since beef has been promoted and it is important to keep consumers thinking about it.
"The ambition over a lengthy period through until 2009/2010 is to to increase the frequency of beef consumption from 2.3 meals to 2.6 meals per week," he said.
"There's a TV advertisement which is a bit quirky, a little bit of humour, that takes up back to the beginning of Australia, the beginning of white settlement in Australia.
"You know it's just a good story about beef and summer, and barbeques."
And as part of a new marketing plan for King Island beef, the product is now being used in gourmet meat pies sold at the supermarket.
Traditionally, only cuts such as eye fillet and porter house have attracted a premium price for the King Island brand.
Tasman Group marketing manager Lydia Horsburgh says the pies will open up the product to a wider group of shoppers.

Young cattle prices slip
Young cattle values in eastern Australia have slipped to their lowest level in three years.
The eastern young cattle indicator fell 29.5 cents in the past week to finish yesterday on 267 cents per kilogram carcase weight.
That means the indicator has fallen 28 per cent since January.
Southern Queensland livestock agent Noel Grant says he is not surprised as beef producers run out of feed and water.
"It's something we expected to happen," he said.
"The confidence has gone out of the store market generally.

Drought relief package changes expected
The Deputy Prime Minister, Mark Vaile, is expected to announce another major drought relief package next week, extending assistance to more farmers, their families and rural businesses.
The package is expected to bring Federal Government drought spending to more than $2 billion.
The Federal Government says further changes to its drought relief package will mean thousands more farmers in more regions will become eligible for exceptional circumstances drought assistance.
It is already encouraging the South and Western Australian state governments to apply for EC status.
It has also listened to calls from Coalition backbenchers for help for farm-related businesses, extra measures to combat rural depression and more emergency assistance for rural families.

Locusts threaten Nullarbor crops
It had appeared that crops near the Nullarbor in South Australia's far west look like being some of the best in the nation because they had received reasonable rain.
But now they are under threat from locusts and local farmers say they are not getting the help they need from the State Government.
Brian Smith from Coorabie, west of Ceduna, says newly hatched locusts are wreaking havoc on crops.
"For the last week at least we've been flat out trying to keep them out the crops as they ripen," he said.
"A lot of the crops in the district now have sort of ripened, but any crops that are a bit later have taken a fair old hammering.
"One farmer I think is probably going to give up on a 400 or 500 acre paddock of barley.

South-west NSW residents pray for rain
Residents of south-west New South Wales have turned to prayer to break the drought.
Farmers and town folk have been united at ecumenical church services.
More than 100 people came together in Wagga to call for rain, while another inter-faith prayer service took place in Leeton.
Pastor Michael Skewes says aside from the spiritual value of prayer, it was a strong show of support for those on the land.
"I think for the farmers that were here - we saw a number of hands go up and say 'yeah, we're farmers' - for them to know that the Wagga community, we in the city really do care for what they're going through I think that's got enormous value as well," he said.
In complete contrast, land clearing fires raging across Kalimantan and Sumatra could be prompting increased rain across the Top End.
Over the past 50 years, some station rainfall has increased by up to 300 millimetres.
Climatologist Sam Cleland says rainfall in parts of the Victoria River district and Kimberley is increasing by 50 millimetres per decade
"It's potentially that it's not a direct result of greenhouse gases," he said.
"It might even be due to increased pollution over South East Asia changing the temperature structure of the atmosphere and the temperature gradient between northern Australia and South East Asia in our summer season.

Grain president resigns after single desk comments
Wrangling over the single desk's future in the nation's largest grain growing state has claimed a scalp.
Earlier this week, the Western Australian Farmers Federation's grain president, Ray Marshall, released a new and alternative policy position, urging the single desk be maintained.
But, at least for this season, he urged that the power of veto be removed from AWB and transferred to the Wheat Export Authority.
The statement has divided group members.

Calls for Biosecurity Aust to be independent authority 'out of line'
A war has broken out over changes to the controversial import risk assessment process.
The federal Agriculture Minister, Peter McGaruan, announced this week that from next year there will be greater scientific scrutiny of the import risk assessments, a regulated time frame and more regular consultation with farmers.
While the National Farmers Federation says the bulk of its members support the new protocols, chief executive Ben Fargher says calls by NSW farmers for Biosecurity Australia to be made into an independent statutory authority are totally out of line.
"It is always so important to have unity when talking to government," he said.
"Disunity when dealing with government is death.

Grape growers welcome trade act changes
Farmers and small businesses have welcomed the passing of amendments to the Trade Practices Act, which simplify collective bargaining.
Murray Valley Winegrowers has been calling for the changes for the past three years.
Chief executive Mike Stone says growers will now be able to genuinely negotiate with wineries.
"Usually grape buyers give growers a price in say January and unless there's a dispute resolution provision that allows growers to dispute those prices they are taken as a given," he said.
"It's a take it or leave it proposition often.

CSIRO NT plant research division closed
The Northern Territory will no longer host a division of CSIRO's plant industry research.
That is despite increased interest in northern agriculture with its good water supplies, and $1 million from the Territory Government to improve the laboratory.

Darwin residents encouraged to save water
People living across tropical northern Australia are also being urged to conserve water.
Darwin residents use more than twice the national average amount of water, but it is hoped converting gardens to suit the dry tropics will help reduce water use.
Some politicians, like independent Gerry Wood, are also calling for small dams to be developed in the Daly region, south-west of Darwin.
"I think we have to look at things differently, whether you collect water in off farm dams during the wet season, to pump out in the dry," Mr Wood said.
"There is certainly potential on the Daly to increase the amount of food.

Drought fails to deter banks from lending
Despite the drought, the banks are still keen to lend to farmers.
Queensland property valuer Kerry Herron says he believes the property market will come back due to the poor seasonal conditions.
He says the boom in recent years has increased landholders' equity and the banks are particularly willing to lend to buyers in the wetter northern regions.
"Cattle is still the flavour of the month and they're still offering very big terms," Mr Herron said.
"We have heard instances of up to 30 years interest only payments, certainly 10 and 15 years interest only is common.

Climate Institute urges more action on greenhouse emissions
The farmer-funded Climate Institute has launched a national advertising campaign, calling on the Federal Government to do more to reduce Australia's greenhouse gas emissions.
The organisation says the drought has been intensified by climate change and a national carbon trading scheme and increased mandatory renewable energy use targets are needed.
In his weekly online radio message the Prime Minister, John Howard, says the Government is spending $2 billion on reducing climate change.
But the Climate Institute's founder, beef and sheep farmer Mark Wootton, says these measures are not working because greenhouse emissions are increasing.
"Under what is put forward at the moment our greenhouse, the Australian government's current policies, increased emissions by 10 per cent over the last decade and it will increase them by a further 17 per cent by 2020 unless we change what we are doing," Mr Wootton said.

Analyst promotes forests as answer to energy supplies
An Australian analyst has dismissed the push for more ethanol and biodiesel production, saying Australia's energy future lies in wood.
Barney Foran, a visiting fellow at the Australian National University, says planting 60 million hectares of forests could provide up to 90 per cent of future transport fuels, and 20 per cent of future electricity needs .
He says many different species of wood could be used, including native trees, and this could provide another source of income for farmers in tough times.
Mr Foran says fuel processing plants should be built in regional areas.
"The key here is that we don't cart wood long distances or else we lose both the economic advantage or more importantly the energy advantage," he said.

Farm Institute report urges rethink on marketing
An independent farm think tank says the Australian farmer's share of world agriculture exports has fallen by almost $3 billion in a decade.
An Australian Farm Institute report, released today, shows Chile and Brazil's agriculture exports doubled in the 10 years to 2004, while Australia's exports grew by only half that amount.
Report author Selwyn Helibron says farmers must focus on how to market their product to their customers, or continue to lose market share.

Crews battle fire near Bathurst
Fire authorities in New South Wales are still trying to control a bushfire north-west of Bathurst.
The fire has burnt 1,400 hectares of grazing and scrub country, threatening a number of houses.
The fire jumped containment lines over the weekend, but was quickly brought back within the lines, by ground crews.

Suspension of WTO talks hampers US efforts to fight AWB
The suspension of World Trade Organisation (WTO) talks is making it harder for US farmers and trade officials to take action to try to end AWB's monopoly for exporting Australian wheat.
The last Doha round draft called for banning or phasing out single-desk monopolies, like AWB, by 2013.
But with WTO talks suspended since July, American Farm Bureau trade adviser Dave Salonsen says there is no way for the US to fight AWB.
"If they are operating according to WTO rules, as they exist now and you can't see that they're somehow not following them, there's not much opportunity, potentially, to go through a dispute settlement," Mr Salonsen said.
Australia agreed in its bilateral free trade deal with the US to address single desk trading in the WTO round.

30,000 cattle imported to Indonesia for Ramadan
At least 30,000 imported cattle have been sold across Indonesia for the Islamic festival of Ramadan.
The last fast will be broken this evening and the food festivities begin with prayer tomorrow morning.
Greg Pankhurst from Agrogiri Perkasa, the largest importer of Australian cattle, says he expects 20,000 cattle will be sold in the coming days.
But he says feedlot sales have still been slower this year.
"We haven't been run off our feet in any way," Mr Pankhurst said.
"We have gone from our traditional 100 a day to 200 a day, which is normal.
"So I have 100 per cent increase in sale but the next three or four days we won't sell anything because most people have their meat stocks in hand.
"Traditionally after Labaran, which is tomorrow and Wednesday we will see a little bit of an increase over and above our normal sales. So we will probably sell about 120 to 140 a day."

Livestock prices slump
Sheep and cattle prices have slumped across the nation, as farmers offload stock they cannot feed.
Sheep have lost nearly 75 per cent of their value in the past four weeks.
Yardings in all states have increased substantially, with the southern states hit hardest.
Travis Parsci, from the National Livestock Reporting Service, says the falls are drastic.
"In the last fortnight we've probably seen 20 to 30 cents shaved off a lot of average prices. We have seen a lot of the plainer grades suffering even larger falls," he said.
"It's been caused by the large number of cattle coming onto the market, as everyone's aware, by the dry condtions, the lack of water in particular and also a lack of feed that a lot of producers are faced with at the moment."
The drought is also pushing wool prices up.
News of Australia's plight is prompting wool buyers to stock up for fear that supplies will run out.
The southern market indicator rose by up to 18 cents at last week's national sales, the biggest weekly rise since January.
Tony Kidman from Quality Wool in south Australia, says buyers also want to avoid buying drought-effected wool, which is less strong than other wool.

Campdrafting Council seeking national endorsement
Campdrafting officials say they are hopeful a bid to have their sport recognised by the Australian Sports Commission will be successful.
The National Campdraft Council of Australia says while the sport was developed in Australia, it still needs to go through the process to become a national sporting organisation.
Council president Peter Cookson says that recognition is very important to the sport's funding and future.
"It's giving campdrafting credibility, to have things such as a code of conduct for animal welfare, member protection policy for the protection of our members and their committees and things like that," Mr Cookson said.

Testing finds Aust wildlife free of bird flu
Ongoing testing across Australia's most susceptible regions have found no evidence of the new lethal strain of bird flu in wildlife.
Last year the H5N1 strain killed thousands of water fowl in China and this year it spread from birds to humans in Indonesia.
Dr John Curran, from the Australian Quarantine Inspection Service, says continuing trapping and testing of wild birds across northern Australia has so far failed to isolate any live influenza viruses.
"But by the same token we're still concerned that the global epidemic is continuing and that this has actually come closer to, the epidemic has come closer to Australia through Indonesia," Dr Curran said.

$5m study to determine Gippsland groundwater decline
The Federal Government has provided $5 million for a study to find out once and for all what is causing declining groundwater levels in Victoria's south Gippsland.
A study by the CSIRO two years ago found subsidence of the Latrobe aquifer was caused mostly by offshore oil and gas production.
Now the Department of Sustainability will conduct further research to see if irrigators should be compensated.
Bill Bodman Senior, from the Victorian Farmers Federation, says the aquifer has been dropping at the rate of one-metre a year for the last 40 years costing farmers thousands of dollars.
"The huge extra cost of lifting the water up the extra distance, that's the major cost in bringing water to the surface," Mr Bodman said.

Canola crop failure drops yield forecasts
The Australian Oilseeds Federation says canola yield forecasts for 2007 are the lowest for a decade.
The estimate for this year's crop is just 561,000 tonnes, due to the failure of many crops across the nation.

Graincorp to ship wheat to eastern states
Graincorp is preparing to ship 1 million tonnes of wheat from Western Australia to the eastern states, as harvests fail in New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland.
The bulk handler will require approval from the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service to convert export terminals on the eastern seaboard to import terminals to receive the grain.
Graincorp's Sam Tainsh says the grain will be transported by rail as well as sea.
"Graincorp is making a number of inland depots available for large volume rail discharge," he said.

Murray Irrigation to introduce cost cutting measures
The country's largest private irrigation company, Murray Irrigation, expects to lose several million dollars this financial year because of the drought.
The company will introduce a four day week from mid-November, reduce its weed control programs and defer maintenance in a bid to cut costs.
General manager George Warne says directors' fees will also be reduced by 20 per cent.

New drought relief package not enough: irrigators
Irrigators say new Victorian Government drought relief does not go far enough.
The Victorian Government has announced a $5,000 rebate for farmers who received less than 50 per cent of their water allocation.
Farmers still pay water authorities even when they do not receive water, due to the cost of maintaining irrigation channels.
Chair of the Northern Victorian Irrigators, Dudley Bryant, says with most large dairy and cropping farms paying bills around $30,000, the Government's offer will only make a small difference.
"They have recognised there's a problem there," he said.
"They have actually said now that they'll pick up the cost of water even though there may be a lot of small hobby farmers and whatever, and I'm not trying to say they should or shouldn't be in it but they are.

NSW irrigators fight for water fee relief
Irrigators in New South Wales are currently having no joy in receiving assistance for their fixed water charges.
Only one inland valley has received a general security allocation this season and there are demands for fee relief across the state.
Chairman of Jemalong Irrigation Ted Morgan says the New South Wales Government must develop its own assistance package for irrigators.
"What we're really looking for is where a set of rules is set up for the valleys where, when you have zero allocation some sort of principles kick in like exceptional circumstances," he said.

AWS announces loss
The wool industry's grower-funded marketing arm has posted a $316,000 annual loss.
Australian Wool Services' (AWS) chairman Barry Walker says the company's Woolmark brand and market research divisions both returned profits.
But its processing section, Andar, returned a deficit and the company's substantial debt to a UK pension fund drained $1.3 million from the business.
Mr Walker says the organisation is battling the effects of the drought and would be deeper in debt if it had not cut costs earlier in the year.
"I think the management did a huge job to reduce the costs against decreased income to actually get us to a loss factor in the finish of $300,000," he said.
"We're finding that the whole wool chain, from farm right through to retail, is extremely difficult.

Govt considers inquiry into forest certification schemes
The Federal Forestry Minister, Eric Abetz, says a push by international green groups to reclassify the sustainable status of Australian timber poses a serious threat to exports.
He says he may set up an inquiry to investigate the disparity between classification systems used to grade old-growth logging in Indonesia, PNG and Australia.
Senator Abetz says the Government is determined to resist a push by the Mexico-based Forest Stewardship Council for Australian timber to lose its 'A' rating among some European customers.
"These groups are then bad mouthing Australia's forest products in countries like the United Kingdom and Belgium," he said.

Growers back forest biofuels industry development
A national group representing commercial and private forest growers has thrown its support behind the development of a forest biofuels industry.
Australian Forest Growers is holding its international conference in Launceston this week and the association's president, David Geddes, says such an industry could be an opportunity for drought-affected farmers.
He says trees are less susceptible to drought than other crops and the wood thinnings would be a valuable source of biofuel.

US beef exports to Korea delayed
A technical issue is delaying the resumption of US beef exports to Korea.
US packers had hoped for an agreement with South Korea on a "bone chip" definition this month after the Koreans agreed in early September to resume imports of US boneless beef.
US Agriculture Department deputy under-secretary, Chuck Lambert, wrote to the Koreans over a month ago and has not had a response.
"The producer segment in Korea's been very opposed to reopening the market, so there is a lot of political pressure in opposition to reopening the market, but the agreement has been that we would open for boneless beef," he said.
But the Koreans have said they will have zero tolerance for bone chips.

Industry, Govt urged to take mining exploration seriously
The mining industry says Australia is sending billions of dollars overseas because of a lack of incentives for local exploration.
Australian companies are at the forefront of an exploration boom in regions like Africa and South America, which offer attractive tax and cost incentives.
While mineral exploration worldwide has hit a record high of more than $US5 billion annually, Australia's share has halved in 10 years.
Justin Walawski from the Association of Mining and Exploration Companies says it is time for industry and the Government to take the issue seriously.

Captive breeding set to boost tuna stocks
A South Australian company says it could duplicate Australia's entire wild catch of more than 5,000 tonnes of tuna within a decade through captive breeding.
This follows the successful airlift of nine southern bluefin tuna from offshore sea cages into a $6 million tank built by Clean Seas Tuna at Arno Bay.
The fish will be used to spawn millions of eggs for harvesting in the world's first captive breeding program for the species.
Chairman Hagen Stehr says he could not put a price on the brood stock.

Hobby farmers work on solving sheep shearing problem
It is hard to find a shearer if you are a hobby farmer and perhaps have just half a dozen pet sheep.
But the growing number of hobby farmers in Western Australia's south-west are working on the problem.
The local community of Manjimup had its sheep shorn, drenched and de-loused for a small fee, with all proceeds to be donated back into the community.
Local shearer Ron Nivon says it is the best way to handle the region's increasing number of pet sheep.
"This is the best thing that ever happened. I think we've been doing it for over 20 years. It's a great cause," he said.
"You don't have that phone ringing and nuisance phone calls asking for five or six sheep shorn when you should be out doing three or 4,000 sheep.

CBH set to launch wheat export pool
Australia's troubled wheat exporter AWB has another force to deal with today with Western Australia's largest grain bulk handler, CBH, attempting to launch a wheat export pool of its own this harvest.
As Western Australian growers consider how they will sell their wheat crop this season, the company today has launched an export licence to test the power of veto that AWB has over its single desk licence.
A previous attempt and subsequent appeal by CBH last December were lost.
CBH chief executive Imre Mencshelyi says the new move will not undermine the single desk and will put more money into growers pockets this season.
"We've agonised over that decision for sometime and today we're launching the CBH wheat pool for 2 million tonne volume for West Australian grain growers," he said.
"At the end of the day we recognise there'll be divided opinion on what we'll be putting out in the market place but the growers will have this opportunity to deliver and they'll vote by their actions."
AWB's Ian Donges says that the export application is an attack on the single desk, and will not necessarily result in growers being paid a higher price over the life of the proposed CBH pool.
Meanwhile, AWB has increased its new season pool returns for premium wheat to $245 a tonne, up $5.

Gold mine operator agrees to provide water to farmers
Farmers have had a breakthrough in their dispute with the new Lake Cowal gold mine in the central west of New South Wales, which has had a dramatic impact on local bore water levels.
The water level has dropped from 20 metres to 50 metres below ground level.
Lachlan Valley Water's Mary Ewing says the company has now agreed to provide stock and domestic water to farmers, if the water table continues to drop.
"One of the requirements is that if those trigger levels are approached, you have to continue to supply the impacted stock and domestics," she said.
"So while there is water there I guess stock and domestic will be maintained.

Anger over latest drought assistance
Farm-related businesses are angry they have been left out of the Federal Government's extended drought assistance package.
An extra $560 million has been allocated to extend assistance to 10,000 more farmers in five states, on top of last week's $350 million announcement.
The president of the Australian Contract Harvesters Association, Peter Bradley, says agriculture-reliant businesses, like harvesters, are also struggling to survive the summer.
"We've been asking and asking and asking the Federal Government for some assistance, but it's got to the stage where it's totally and absolutely critical at this stage that we do at least get interest rate subsidies on our financing."
But the drought package has been welcomed by the National Farmers Federation and the Association of Rural Financial Counselling Services.
And the Country Womens Association president, Lesley Young, says the $4 million her organisation has received will allow it to revive emergency aid programs.

Lower canola yield a boosts returns
The huge drop in canola production has sent prices up as high as $555 a tonne at east coast ports, almost double last year's returns.
Canola yield forecasts for 2007 are the lowest for a decade due to the drought, down to just 561,000 tonnes, a third of the size of last year's crop.
Australian Wheat Forecasters analyst Ron Storey says canola will have to be transported from coast to coast to meet crushing requirements.
"Most of the canola crop this year will be in Western Australia, we look like having you know something under half a million tonnes of canola in total and more than half of that is going to be in WA," he said.

Farmers to import alternative dairy cattle feed
Dairy farmers will continue to use alternative feeds such as palm kernel meal as grain supplies tighten.
Farmers in Victoria say grain prices have jumped from $215 to $360 per tonne in recent weeks.
Brian Bailey, from grain price monitoring company AWF, says dairy farmers will have to import more of the alternative feeds.
"You can get the requirements of energy protein and amino acids from products such as palm kernel meal which comes from Malaysia," he said.

Grain price rise hits chicken producers
Increased grain prices are also affecting chicken meat producers and processors.
Philip Schmidt from the South Australian Farmers Federation says grain makes up the largest expense for producers, who will struggle to cut costs elsewhere.
"The cost of grains is rising quite significantly over the last year to approximately nationally about 80 per cent already increase," he said.

Wine glut prompts call for structural change
A new report on Australia's wine industry says our stocks have ballooned to an estimated two billion litres, as global wine production grows faster then demand.
The study by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural Resource Economics also warns Australia has no ability to influence the world wine market, because it has only 5 per cent of global production.
Chris Byrne, from the Riverland Wine Grape Growers Association, says serious structural change is needed.
"We're producing more than double the amount of wine grapes we need from those regions that cannot afford to grow popular premium products," he said.
"You have to solve that by working with growers and wine-makers to decide which regions cannot be sustainable.

Mixed response to CBH's wheat export push
There has been mixed reaction in Western Australia to the state's main grain handler CBH launching a bid to export two million tonnes of wheat this harvest.
CBH announced it would offer grain growers $265-275 a tonne, topping the offer of monopoly exporter AWB.
The Western Australian Farmers Federation says the plan encourages short-term thinking and it is worried about the impact of taking so much grain from the national pool.
But Leon Bradley, from the Pastoralists and Graziers Association, says growers should have another wheat export option.
"Well the main benefit is too obvious to state," he said.
"$20 or $30 above AWB's estimate, which is very significant in a low production year in terms of farm profitability."
Meanwhile, the federal Treasurer, Peter Costello, has further opened divisions in the Coalition over the future of the single desk wheat export system.
Deputy Prime Minister Mark Vaile says the Government remains committed to the single desk until the Cole inquiry into AWB kickback allegations reports.
But Mr Costello has suggested wheat growers should get the chance to export wheat at the higher rates being offered by CBH.

Dairy farmers co-op announces profit increase
The Sydney-based Dairy Farmers Co-operative has announced a 25 per cent increase in its profits for the last financial year.
The co-operative has posed a $17.4 million profit at a meeting in Sydney today.

Group to consider moratorium over land clearing
An important meeting of land managers is taking place today in the Northern Territory's Douglas Daly region, south-west of Darwin.
Allocation of water and land clearing head the agenda of the Government-appointed advisory group, which is preparing to make recommendations.
Pastoralists, like Diana Elliot of Kingfisher Station, want the moratorium over land clearing lifted quickly.
She says broken promises about development have prompted some investors to consider seeking compensation.
"At the moment we have cleared one-seventh of our block, and we would be looking to clear at least say 30 per cent," she said.

Seaweed fertiliser helping farmers battle frost
Farmers are using seaweed fertiliser as a way to protect horticultural crops from frost.
Victoria has had several frosts in the past month, with cherries, grapes, stone fruit and apple crops being damaged.
Scientists believe the liquid fertiliser works by hardening the plants cells, so the frost cannot pull the moisture out of the fruit.
Consultant Dr Colin Young, a former Melbourne University chemistry professor, says there are limitations to the seaweed's effect.
"It takes 12 hours to kick in and then gives you reasonable protection for two weeks then it starts to decrease," he said.

Tas couple take out top tree farming award
Tasmanians John and Diana Lord have been declared Australia's top tree farmers.
The Lords, from Longford in the state's north, won the title from among six other state finalists at the Australian Forest Growers international conference in Launceston last night.
The family started tree farming in the 1980s and now manages three forest properties and a 1,200-hectare mixed farm.
John Lord says his philosophy has been to plant trees on abandoned farmland where native bush cannot be re-established.
"Over the past couple of decades we've bought some land that was derelict, mainly on the Western Tiers," he said.

Cherries make $55,000 for charity
A record $55,000 has been paid for two boxes of the season's first cherries at a charity auction in Sydney.
They were bought by the owner of a chain of fruit shops in Sydney and will be distributed to children in hospital.
Cherry Growers president Ian Hay says there was fierce competition to supply the charity box between growers from Griffith in New South Wales and the South Australian Riverland.
"They actually had a competition in the central markets to get the best box of cherries and they couldn't split between these two cases so they actually put up two cases," he said.

Daylight saving bill introduced to WA Parliament
After years of resistance, Western Australians could have daylight saving in place by this summer.
A bill will be introduced into State Parliament today to set-up a daylight saving trial from the start of December.
If the bill is passed, a referendum will take place after three summers, in 2009.

PM to hear farmers' drought concerns
Farmers will put their concerns about the Federal Government's drought assistance package to the Prime Minister today.
John Howard has started a two day tour of drought hit regions in New South Wales, as dryland farmers call for grants to re-sow their crops when the drought breaks.
Mr Howard says now that the Federal Government has committed a total of $2.1 billion in drought assistance, it is time for the states to do their part in the form of water rates relief.
Mr Howard is particularly critical of the NSW Government because he says some of the Federal Government's drought assistance is going straight into their coffers for water charges.

Drought stricken areas to receive extra funding
The South Australian Government will provide a further $4 million to help drought stricken farming families and communities.
Some of the new measures include $1.3 million for stamp-duty relief, $330,000 for more rural financial counselling services and funds to help the SA Farmers Federation (SAFF) coordinate exceptional circumstances applications.
State Agriculture Minister Rory McEwen says much of South Australia still has to mount a case for drought assistance.
"We are providing resources to both SAFF to coordinate the applications and to community or industry group that's done the application, the resources they need to actually put the application together," he said.
"The challenge in South Australia of course is a whole lot of us aren't EC declared.

Rain prospects improve
There is an improved prospect of rain for some parts of Australia over summer.
The National Climate Centre's latest climate outlook still predicts some of the country's most drought affected land will stay drier than normal over the next three months.
South-east Queensland and much of New South Wales will only have a 30 to 40 per cent chance of receiving above average rainfall.
And a hot summer is still forecast for most of eastern Australia, with the confirmation of the El Nino weather pattern.
But meteorologist Grant Beard says it is not all bad news, as some areas could get above average rainfall.
"It's more encouraging for northern and north-west Queensland," he said.
"There's an increased likelihood of wetter than average conditions there and it's not quite as discouraging as it was in the south-east of the country as well where the probabilities have risen from around about 40 per cent or a bit lower last outlook.

Govt grant to help cut dairy processor's water use
The major dairy processor in Victoria, Murray Goulburn, is receiving assistance from the Bracks Government to help it cut back on its water use.
The Murray Goulburn plant in Leongatha in Gippsland is one of the biggest water consumers in the region.
Chairman of Murray Goulburn Ian McAulay says he hopes the $1.6 million government grant will mean there is more water left for local towns and farms.
"This one is quite significant," he said.

Project to boost truckie numbers
The transport industry is holding out its arms to farmers needing employment during the drought.
A short course in truck driving is being offered at Wodonga in Victoria by the National Industrial Skills Training Centre to allow farmers to re-train as truckies.
Manager Sput Lowry says the project will help boost driver numbers.

Govt urged to acquire Snowy Hydro
A New South Wales parliamentary inquiry has called on the Federal Government to acquire Snowy Hydro, but to guarantee the electricity generator remain in public hands.
Inquiry chairman the Reverend Gordon Moyes says Snowy Hydro needs a capital injection of $800 million to remain viable in the national electricity market, but that share holding governments are reluctant to fund it.

Bananas not to blame for inflation rise: wholesaler
The Queensland fruit and vegetable industry says it is ridiculous to blame inflation on the price of bananas.
The latest consumer price figure rose 0.9 per cent in the three months to September, with the federal Treasurer singling out banana prices as a factor.
And on the basis of the CPI, the Reserve Bank is expected to increase interest rates next month.
But Brisbane wholesaler Tony Joseph says while banana prices have gone through the roof, there has only been 10 per cent of normal supplies on the market .
"Bananas have been as high as 130, $140 a case, which is way above their normal price, most probably around the mid-20s when we've got a full supply of bananas," he said.

Cloned animal products may reach US shelves
Consumers in the US may see meat and dairy products from cloned animals on their supermarket shelves next year.
The US Food and Drug Administration has submitted draft recommendations to Washington, which appear to support the sale of products from cloned animals, quoting research that says the food will be as safe as that from conventionally-bred animals.
The sale of cloned animal product is currently prohibited in the US.
But Scott Kinnear, from the Biological Farmers of Australia, says organic farmers are watching the issue with concern.
"We don't think that cloned foods are necessarily safe for the long-term," he said.

NSW cherry growers to push for southern market
New South Wales cherry growers will renew a push today to get their fruit into southern Australian markets by raising the issue when the Prime Minister visits Goulburn.
The producers have been stopped from getting fruit into these markets because of concerns over fruit flies.
National Cherry Growers president, Ian Hay, says despite international markets accepting fruit fly management protocols, southern states will not accept them.
"If we can do protocols to get fruit safely overseas, surely we have got to be able to move it across the country as well," he said.
"If we don't make sure we have tidied up that homework here in Australia, those countries to protect their borders and decide they won't need a tariff, they will just turn around and say, 'hey you can't even get cherries out of NSW into Victoria.'

Mine to reopen due to surging gold prices
The Bronzewing gold mine in central Western Australia is set to reopen on the back of climbing gold prices.
The mine and its extraction plant and accommodation village have been mothballed for the past three years after being bought for $9 million by View Resources.
Managing director Tim Gooch says the company has secured debt financing and says strong investor support and current market conditions could see the open cut and underground mine operating again within months.
"We've been modelling on around $A800 an ounce," he said.

Vets to audit captive devils after tumour discovery
Vets in Tasmania are conducting an audit of a wildlife parks in the north of the State after the discovery this week of two devils with the devastating facial tumour disease.
It is the first time the disease has been found within a captive population.
It has already wiped out half the wild devil population.
Veterinary pathologist Stephen Pyecroft says as yet there is no screening test available for the disease, so it is a waiting game for the rest of the devils at the wildlife park.
"One of the areas that we have been looking at reasonably closely since the start of the program is to try to get an indicator test or the thing that we are sort of calling a clinical test for the cancer," he said.

Northern pastoralists not convinced about daylight saving
The debate about introducing a three-year trial for daylight saving in Western Australia has left pastoralists in the tropics feeling excluded.
The daylight saving Bill was introduced to Parliament this week and is expected to receive support from most MPs.
If it passes, clocks will be put forward an hour in December.
But one pastoralist in the Kimberley, where it is already 39 degrees Celsius each day, says it will not advantage him.
"We normally start very early," he said.

Trading hours row closes Palace Hotel
One of the country's most famous outback hotels has called last drinks for the last time after failing to win a bid to trade for 24 hours.
The Palace Hotel in Broken Hill opened in the 1880s and achieved worldwide fame by appearing in the film Priscilla, Queen of the Desert.
But last night, owner Marat Celotto shut the doors, saying his business was doomed following the council's refusal to extend his trading hours.
"It's a very hard decision at the moment," he said.

Rural incomes predicted to slump
A major bank is forecasting rural incomes will fall by 60 per cent this financial year.
The National Australia Bank predicts incomes will drop by $4.6 billion from last year to just $3 billion.
But the bank's Jeff Oughton does not believe it will push farmers off the land.
"I don't think a lot of farmers will be leaving the industry, going into this drought we've seen farm property values rise very strongly over the past five years," he said.

ABARE farm production estimates lowered again
There is another gloomy forecast from the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) today.
It has further lowered its estimate for this year's drought-hit wheat harvest to 9.5 million tonnes, the smallest crop since 1995.
It says the national barley crop could drop 64 per cent on last year, with canola yields down 69 per cent.
ABARE also says beef earnings are expected to fall 13 per cent.

PM's drought tour focuses on irrigation
The Prime Minister is continuing his tour of drought-affected areas of New South Wales and today the focus is on the irrigation industry.
Tonight at Finley, in the Riverina, the locals will gather to pray for rain.
But today, they are asking the John Howard for help.
On a visit to a dairy farm, Mr Howard heard that with zero water allocation, producers have been forced to pay high prices for temporary water.
That, coupled with rising costs of feed grain, is putting the squeeze on farm finances.
Mr Howard is also expected to meet with local community leaders later this afternoon.
Meanwhile, young farmers, harvesters and other farm contractors say the drought assistance package probably will not be enough to keep many of them on the land.
Western NSW crop spraying contractor, Andrew Oliver, who spoke to Mr Howard yesterday, says he and his friends are sick of watching their businesses run down.

Frost devastates Clare Valley vineyards
Another of South Australia's premium wine regions has been devastated by frost.
The Barossa Valley, Coonawarra and Padthway have experienced crop losses ranging from 20 and 90 per cent.
Now the Clare Valley, north of Adelaide, has also been hit.
Trelawney Vineyard manager Tracey Sandow estimates last weekend's big freeze ruined hundreds of tonnes of grapes.
"The frost came in Saturday morning and anything on the low lying areas of the vineyard was basically blackened off completely," she said.

Storms bring good and bad to mid-west farmers
It has been a mix of pain and good fortune for Western Australia's farmers and pastoralists, after wild storms tore through the Gascoyne, Murchison and parts of the mid-west and northern wheatbelt.
Strong winds and rainfall of 60 to 90 millimetres destroyed some farm crops and damaged fences.
But further north, pastoralists have welcomed the rain after such a dry winter.
Geoff Pilkington from Kirkalocka Station, south of Mt Magnet, says strong winds and hail created a fierce storm.
"Dark skies and threatening for most of the morning and then the heavens just opened and it was just amazing," he said.
"At the mine site and in Mt Magnet town site, there was huge hail stones and apparently they were the size of golf balls and two or three inches thick on the ground, so it's just an amazing event."

Tobacco growers vote to accept exit package
Australia no longer has a legal tobacco growing industry.
Tobacco was grown in Queensland and Victoria, but British American Tobacco and Phillip Morris have now announced they will be withdrawing from Australia by 2008 because overseas crops are cheaper.
Growers in both states yesterday voted to accept an exit package made up of $15 million from the tobacco companies and $17 million from the Federal Government.
That amounts to a maximum payment of $150,000 per grower, which producers say is an offer too good to refuse.
Queensland Nationals Senator Ron Boswell says the Government hopes the tobacco farmers will be able to find alternative crops, but admits it will be difficult.
"In the case of Merribra it's a long way from the market so it's difficult to find something they can grow commercially, but some of the farms may go over to sugar which is doing okay at the moment," he said.

GM cotton gets green light in northern Australia
The Office of the Gene Technology Regulator has approved the commercial release of genetically modified (GM) cotton for northern Australia.
It is satisfied that five varieties of GM cotton designed to be herbicide and insect resistant will have minimum impacts on tropical environments.
The decision is unlikely to benefit Western Australia's Kimberley region, since the State Government has a moratorium on all GM crops until 2008.
But Cotton Australia's Philip Russell says there is now nothing stopping farmers in north Queensland growing it commercially when prices pick up.
"In Queensland there's no moratorium and we certainly have some interested people up in the Burdekin area of north Queensland who potentially could grow cotton," he said.

Bega Cheese chalks up $10.5m profit
It is a record profit year, despite the drought, for New South Wales based dairy business Bega Cheese.
It posted a $10.5 million profit on a $280 million turnover.
The Bega Dairy Co-op employs more than 500 people, exports to 50 countries and produces Australia's top-selling domestic cheese brand.
Chairman Barry Irvin says all the Co-op profits were returned to the 100 farmer owners, to help see them through the worst drought in a century.

Nickel mining reveals promising results
Underground miners at Australia's newest nickel mine have intersected the first of a number of a high grade nickel sulphide ore bodies.
The Flying Fox mine at Forestania, 400 kilometres east of Perth, hosts one of the highest grade nickel deposits in the world.
The price of nickel is currently at a record high.
Western Areas NL managing director Julian Hanna says it is just the beginning of a long-term nickel operation.
"Initially that ore will be toll treated at a nearby treatment plant to produce a nickel concentrate which will end up being exported to Canada," he said.

Waste water scheme to benefit Tamworth farm
Tamworth council in north-west New South Wales has showcased one of the first environmental spin-offs of a planned waste water project.
It is a 140 hectare wedge of rehabilitated grassy box woodlands at the edge of what will become a farm which re-uses the city's water and effluent to grow crops.
Tamworth regional water augmentation manager Nigel Thompson says the project has environmental bonuses for the city.

Wage increase causes concern
Agricultural employers are voicing their concern about the Australian Fair Pay Commission's wage increase to low-paid workers.
The commission yesterday granted workers on less than $700 a week an extra $27.36 in their pay packet.
The National Farmers Federation says it is disappointed with the decision.
And Michael Badcock, from grower group AUSVEG, says the increase will make it harder for Australia to compete with imported fruit and vegetables.
"It's going to put vegetable farmers in Australia in a very bad position," he said.
"We've got a lot of pressures with cheaper imports coming into Australia and now all of a sudden we've got to pay this extra increase in wages.
"It's going to make it very difficult for us to compete in the global market."
The Australian Workers Union, which represents many low-paid employees in agriculture, says the increase is good but could have been better.
Organiser Terry O'Connor admits he was pleasantly surprised by the decision.

Minister to sport new 'cat in the hat' headgear
Federal Environment Minister Ian Campbell is getting an unusual present in the mail from King Island in northern Tasmania.
It is a hat made from a feral cat pelt collected during the island's cat trapping program.
Senator Campbell was on King Island recently and mentioned he would not mind a hat as a reminder of his trip.
Hat maker Robyn Eades says she hopes the size is right for a politician's head.

Tassie cow gets leg up
The famous three-legged Tasmanian cow called Theresa is back on all fours after being fitted with a prosthetic leg this week.
Theresa broke a back leg in July when she fell down a river bank and her owner had the leg amputated.
After considerable media coverage, offers of wooden legs came from across Australia and an artificial limb maker from Launceston delivered on the challenge.
Theresa's owner, Geoff Heazlewood, says he never expected to see his heifer with a wooden leg.
"No I didn't, it was sort of one of those silly ideas that became reality I guess," he said.

Fishing industry wants govt help to keep businesses afloat
The fishing industry is trying to adapt to the recent Federal Government buyback of 400 fishing licences.
The buyback has led to a 70 per cent drop in fish being supplied to the Twofold fishing co-operative at Eden on the south coast of New South Wales.
But chairman Fritz Drenkhahn says members are chasing federal assistance to keep the business afloat.
"The decision of the members was yes to go ahead to strive in all directions to maintain it open [but] a lot hinges on the business assistance package which we'll be applying for," he said.

Pig ad campaign misleading, say pork producers group
Animal rights activists have launched a new advertising campaign against pig farming.
The ads, put together by the groups Voiceless and Animals Australia, depict pigs in small pens with minimal room and piglets having their eye teeth clipped.
But Australian Pork Limited says the campaign is misleading.
Spokesman Andrew Spencer says the ads are designed to be emotional and are not an accurate reflection of how pigs are grown commercially in Australia.
"The types of words they're using are not trying to portray the independent view of the way pigs are raised," he said.

Wool prices spike
The wool market has hit a two year high.
The eastern market indicator rose a further 3 per cent last week to close on 782 cents a kilogram.
The biggest price hikes were for wool in the medium 19 to 24 micron range, up between 30 and 59 cents a kilogram in Sydney.
Chairman of Inland New South Wales Wool Brokers Rowan Woods says buyers are becoming worried about future supply.
"This had to come. I think there is a real perception or a realisation from the trade that supply will be tight," he said.
"The number of stock that are being sold. You have only got to look at Wagga - 250,000 sheep roughly in a month down there. A hell of a big dent in the number of sheep that will supply wool to the trade.

Work visa crackdown won't stop exploitation, says union
The Meat Industry Union says a new crack down on temporary work visas will not stop migrant exploitation.
The Federal Government will set up an investigative strike force to make sure employers are complying with the conditions of the 457 visas, which allow skilled overseas workers into Australia.
Union spokesman Russell Carr says problems are mainly in smaller meat processing workers, which are largely un-unionised.
"What would be better is what would have applied before the industrial law changes to allow unions right of access to those workplaces and unions will check that out for free of charge for the taxpayer," he said.

Beef producers urged not to vote in MLA elections
The Australian Beef Association (ABA) says beef producers should not bother voting in this year's board elections for peak body Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA).
The renegade lobby group has failed to win previous resolutions to remove directors from the MLA board and has not submitted any this year.
President Linda Hewitt says it is pointless to vote because ABA resolutions can be vetoed by the MLA board.
But MLA managing director David Palmer says that has never occurred.
"All I can say is that we should just look at history. Several resolutions have come up year after year," he said.
"Some from the board, some from the registered levy payers, all have been voted upon and all have been acted upon and no vetoes have been applied from board's or from council of that matter."

Livestock transporters fear for future
Some livestock transporters fear they will be forced to leave the industry because of the drought.
