It named one possible cause as dust from holding yards at the abattoir.
None had direct contact with livestock, the usual transmitter of the disease.
The meatworks is owned by Norvic Food Processing.
The company's general manager, John Hayes, acknowledged that eventually the abattoir will have to be relocated.

Cole inquiry awaits documents ruling
The oil-for-food inquiry into allegations AWB paid $300 million in kickbacks to the Iraqi regime of Saddam Hussein has been adjourned to a date to be fixed.
The inquiry is now waiting for the Federal Court to decide if hundreds of secret AWB documents can be examined by Commissioner Terence Cole.

Rail price dispute may see grain trucked
AWB and GrainCorp say all Queensland grain could have to be transported by road in future because they have not been able to strike a deal on freight rates with Queensland Rail.
The rail company says there has been a verbal agreement for a 12 per cent average increase in freight rates.
But Lachlan Benson, from AWB, says there is no deal and the proposed increases of between 10 and 20 per cent are concerning.
''The proposed rates put forward raise serious concerns with us as to whether rail remains a viable option for growers to export their grain," he said.
"What that actually might mean for the rail network ... [is] you are going to see a large percentage of the harvest transferring to road."

Expert urges stronger water rules
The rights of farmers and rural and regional communities to have access to water is expected to cause legal battles in the future.
A water policy expert believes state governments need to improve the legal framework for water, as new pipelines are built to solve water shortages in the cities.
Professor Jennifer McKay, from the University of South Australia, says there many issues with piping water from one region to another.
"Because we're now entering the era where we will be cross-sharing water between different watersheds," she said.
"This will bring up the issue of payments and intersectoral conflicts.

Goulburn Murray water diversion 'not fair'
Farmers are dismayed at the Victorian Government's plan to divert water away from the Goulburn Murray irrigation district to supply two regional cities.
The State Government is building a pipeline from the Waranga Basin to Bendigo, and now wants to extend it as far as Ballarat.
But Simon Ramsey says it is not fair on dairy farmers and fruit growers, who will only receive 7 per cent of the water allocations this season.
"It's disappointing given the angst and apprehension in the rural community about the present prolonged dry conditions and also obviously the very little allocations particularly in the Goulbourn system and Campaspe," he said.

Worker relocation scheme raises social concerns
Social welfare groups have concerns about Federal Government plans to pay the unemployed to move to regional areas to fill labour shortages.
Under a pilot scheme, the Government will offer potential workers up to $5,000 to move from areas with above-average unemployment.
The Agrifoods Industry Skills Council says there needs to be major infrastructure infrastructure to make the project work.
Lin Hatfield-Dodds, from the Australian Council of Social Service, has concerns about the impact of the proposal on workers.
"Our concern is just if people do move for work what happens if that job doesn't work out, what supports and what safety nets are we going to put in place to enable people to go back to where they've come from?" she said.
"But there's also and probably more importantly the organisational and emotional costs of moving and the relational costs.
"People who do move a large distance for work often find that they can feel isolated."
The mining sector does not think the project will help ease the labour shortage.
Reg Howard-Smith, from the WA Chamber of Minerals and Energy, says the practice of flying workers in and out of mine sites could be a major stumbling block.
"We haven't seen details on what's proposed but if it's a requirement to live in a regional centre, then obviously that precludes people working on a fly-in fly-out basis," he said.

Govt accused of withholding horticulture reports
The Horticulture Council has accused the Federal Government of withholding two independent reports, which it says highlight major failings in the sector's voluntary code of conduct.
The two-year-old reports into the sector's existing code were only published on the Produce and Industry Ombudman's website today.
The move comes just days after federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran signalled that a new code to improve transparency in the industry, might also be voluntary.
The council's Mark Panitz says the reports back up grower claims that the existing code is not working.
"Look the fundamental issue is that Government's kept these annual reports in the bottom draw so they wouldn't be in the public domain during this debate about the need for a mandatory code," he said.
"Now that person's report, an independent report, has said there's systemic problems within the industry within these annual reports and it's also clear evidence that the voluntary code doesn't work."

Thousands flock to Birdsville Races
This weekend all outback roads lead to Queensland's far south-west corner, for the famous Birdsville Races.
Spectators and competitors travel for days to attend the two-day race meet, which culminates with the $25,000 Birdsville Cup tomorrow.
Karen Brook, the official race photographer, says the organisers are expecting about 6,000 people to attend.
"Last night it was one of the biggest crowds a lot of us have seen," she said.
"In town we actually have the Variety Bash Rally ended in Birdsville on Wednesday.
"That in alone put another 700 people in Birdsville on Wednesday night that have now stayed for the weekend.

Spring brings higher demand for flowers
It is the first day of spring and today marks the beginning of the peak demand season for fresh flowers.
Victorian wild flower farmer James Frew says its the busiest time of the year as he prepares to sell to the hungry Sydney market.
He says the eastern markets are the most lucrative for flower producers.
"The market in Sydney is just, 'What have you got, what have you got? What can you send me?" he said.

Flower industry 'needs marketing' to blossom
Flower growers are being told they need to invest up to half-a-million dollars in a national marketing campaign to boost sales.
The industry generates up to $900 million in farm gate sales each year.
Brian Shannon, from the Flower Association of Queensland, says that figure could double, if Australia heeds the British experience.
"They had a marketing campaign over there that increased the sale of cut flowers by 100 per cent over five years," he said.
"What we're trying to do is let our members and growers know that this is the sort of thing we need to do in Australia.

Cattle, lamb slaughterings down
The number of animals being slaughtered for meat across Australia has fallen for the fourth month in a row.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics says cattle slaughterings in July fell to 640,000, the lowest since last December.

CWA calls for country of origin labels
The Country Women's Association (CWA) is calling on shoppers to buy homegrown produce at the supermarket, to help ensure the survival of Australian agriculture.
The 32nd national conference of the CWA has brought more than 100 delegates to Darwin this week.
The new president, Tasmanian Leslie Young, says cheap imports and the drought mean it is time for everybody to work together.

Banana prices tipped to stay high
If you were hoping to see a fall in the price of bananas this month, wholesalers are warning us not to hold our breath.
Market analysts have been predicting a gradual return of bananas to the market, as north Queensland farms recover from the impact of cyclone Larry.
That would lead to lower prices.
But Sydney banana wholesaler Harry Theoharous says those high prices will be around for a few months yet.
"We've been getting a reasonable volume of fruit out of the New South Wales growing areas and as they've gone through a very cold winter their supplies now do dwindle away," he said.
"We do see a slight increase of fruit coming out of Queensland but we're still looking at around 20 weeks before we get some reasonable volumes coming in.

Snail forces citrus shipment redirection
A brown snail the size of a pin head has been found in a shipment of Australian citrus fruit being exported to the United States.
It is the second year in a row that a snail from a packing shed in the Sunraysia region has been found by US quarantine officials.
Peter Walker, from exporter Riversun, says somehow the snail slipped through local quarantine procedures.
The affected fruit will now have to be sold to another country.

Quarantine protocols hit fruit, vegetable growers
The Australian Horticultural Exporters Association says it has never been harder or more expensive to send fruit and vegetables overseas.
It says the value of horticulture exports has fallen $230 million, or 30 per cent, since 2003.
Deputy chair David Minnis says tougher quarantine protocols imposed by other countries are taking their toll.
"Just about any fruit that's host for fruit fly - so mangoes, table grapes, stonefruit, cherries, apples, pears, citrus - all of these fruits have restrictions put on their movement into a whole range of countries," he said.

Cattle industry prefers 'duffing' to 'rustling'
A move is on to halt the Americanisation of English in rural areas.
The cattle industry is demanding an end to the use of the American phrase "cattle rustling" when referring to livestock theft, rather than the more Aussie "cattle duffing".
Language expert Professor Roly Sussex, from the University of Queensland, says the term "cattle rustling" is now widespread, but it is neither necessary nor particularly appropriate.

Newton named produce Ombudsman
A new Ombudsman has been appointed to regulate disputes between fruit and vegetable producers and buyers.
It follows the release of two reports questioning the merits of a voluntary code of conduct for the industry.
The Federal Government has appointed David Newton from the Sydney-based Accord group as the Produce and Grocery Ombudsman.
Growers want a mandatory code of conduct to help them negotiate with supermarkets and wholesalers but the Federal Government seems to be leaning towards a voluntary code.
Mr Newton says there is nothing wrong with a voluntary code.
"I think there are pluses and minuses in each one, but I wouldn't say that just because a mandatory code is in place that that is going to provide 100 per cent improvement over voluntary," he said.

Westpac predicts base metals price drops
In the mining sector the shine is coming off the price of base metals, with forecaster Westpac predicting a 35 per cent drop by the end of the year.
Mining company Consolidated Minerals is blaming a major slump in the price of manganese for a $6 million loss posted yesterday.
Commodity strategist Tobin Gorey says base metal prices are closely aligned to the US economy, which is starting to show signs of slowing down.
"It's been about a consumer spending boom, they've spent a lot of money on a lot of different things, especially houses and so on," he said.
"Those consumers in their houses and in their cars and stuff too, use up a lot of metals, particularly copper and so on, and if that demand slows as it is now, then prices will fall."

Wool market climbs slightly
There were slight gains in the wool market this week, with only a small number of bales offered at sales in Sydney, Melbourne and Fremantle.
The Eastern Market Indicator finished the week at 751 cents a kilogram, up three cents.
The best results were in Melbourne, with finer microns jumping between 10 and 30 cents.

Dubbo merino ram sales prices down
The tough conditions have been reflected at one of the nation's top merino ram sales, which has recorded lower average prices than last year.
The annual sale at Dubbo in central western New South Wales attracted hundreds of wool growers from across the country hoping to pick up a bargain.
The top price paid was just $18,000 for a local Roseville Park Stud ram, compared to last year's high of $43,000.
Dave Hart, from Landmark, says some breeders made the most of the keen competition.
"There was a bit of pessimism around in the shed leading up to the sale," he said.
"I think it was a great value for money sale for stud and commercial growers, that will tend to happen, they are the rams that the smarter commercial growers will come here and pick up.

Murray River winter flows at record low
The Murray River has had its lowest winter flows on record due to the dry conditions across the Murray Darling Basin.
In a normal year almost 4,000 gigalitres of water flows down the system, but this year only about 400 gigalitres was recorded.
Trevor Jacobs, from River Murray Water, says New South Wales irrigators will be most affected.
"Very limited water availability to New South Wales in particular," he said.

Australia endures driest August since 1900
On this first day of spring there is little surprise at news Australia has endured its driest August since records began in 1900.
Preliminary figures show a national average rainfall of just 6.87 millimetres for August.
Overall, an average of 43.9 millimetres of rain fell across Australia during the winter.
Senior climatologist at the Bureau of Meteorology, Dr Andrew Watkins, says it has been decades since rain was so scarce.
"Australia-wide we only averaged about 6.2 millimetres for the month, so a very dry month," he said.
"Our previous driest Augusts were in 1914 and unfortunately 1982 is also a comparison - it had about 7.5 millimetres.

Alpacas killed in dog attack
Police are appealing for public help after four alpacas were killed in a dog attack at Yea in Central Victoria.
The Alpacas were worth about $100,000 each.

Scientists to tackle ocean census
In a bid to measure the impact of the fishing industry scientists have decided to count every living thing in the ocean.
The world's first ocean census is under way and when it is finished in 2010 it will be used to help regulate the fishing industry.
Senior scientist on the project Ron O'Dor says identifying every ocean species is proving tough for some researchers.
"They were two and a half kilometres down in the water column on the end of a line chasing this octopus with a slurp gun that goes 'slurp' and sucks the animal in and then brings it back alive," he said.

NT's Vatskalis replaced by newcomer Natt
The Northern Territory has a new Primary Industries, Fisheries, Mines and Energy Minister.
In a ministerial reshuffle caused by the resignation of health minister Peter Toyne, the portfolio has gone to newcomer Chris Natt.
One of his first jobs as Minister will be to be decide on the controversial McArthur River Mine expansion.
However outgoing mines minister Kon Vatskalis, who has been promoted to Business, Economic and Regional Development, says Mr Natt's inexperience might actually be an advantage.
"Working to a portfolio that you know nothing [about], it gives you the opportunity to actually develop," he said.
"It gives you the opportunity to do something different.

Middle East chefs go on Aussie culinary tour
Top chefs and food buyers from the Middle East will tour Australia this month, searching for the best local produce.
The ten-day visit will take in fresh markets and food producing companies in four states.
Marketing company Australian Quality Plus hopes to increase sales of meat and seafood to the region as well as introducing new products like dairy.
Managing director Steve Marafiote says Australian products have gained a reputation in the Middle East for their quality and sustainable supply.
"We've really tried to show the higher end, high-quality products that are available out of Australia - show those benefits that are available," he said.

Gold production hits lowest level in a decade
Despite record high prices this year, gold production in Australia has dropped to its lowest level in 10 years.
The latest figures show a fall to 251 tonnes of gold during the past financial year.
Sandra Close from consultants Surbiton Associates says bad weather during the March quarter is largely to blame, while a lack of exploration is also a problem.
"Since the late '90s exploration for gold has gone from about 60 per cent of total mineral exploration expenditure down to around 30 per cent of total mineral exploration expenditure," she said.

Biofuel industry unviable without Govt support, says expert
A new report has confirmed calls by the renewable energy sector for more support from the Federal Government.
The report from Rabobank, a leading agribusiness bank, says a serious biofuels industry is unviable unless there is a long-term policy commitment.
Spokeswoman Ingrid Richardson says ethanol and biodiesel production will not be economical unless there are Government mandates.
"My report looks at what's happened in the US, what's happened in Brazil, what's happened in Europe and basically all the support there is very long term," she said.

Cattle producers urged to put off slaughter
Cattle producers and dairy farmers facing the prospect of another drought in Victoria are being urged to "park" their cows rather than send them to slaughter.
The livestock saleyards have been packed with cheap cows and steers, as dry weather and low water allocations hit feed supplies.
Doug Chant from United Dairy Farmers of Victoria says agistment schemes have been vital during previous droughts.
"Their only other option is to sell cows to go to slaughter and one of the concerns is that it takes so long to rebuild herds," he said.

Beattie's reaction to frozen bananas 'outrageous'
Queensland Premier Peter Beattie has been accused of using concern over processed banana imports to boost his state election campaign.
Voters go to the polls on Saturday.
Mr Beattie says the Federal Government has broken its promise not to allow banana imports while Queensland growers recover from Cyclone Larry.
Eleven tonnes of cooked frozen banana pulp from Vietnam has been brought in for use by food manufacturers.
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says the local industry is not threatened in any way.
"It's outrageous that the Premier would seize on this and create a quarantine scare when none exists and cause worry for many banana growers, who may not know the true situation," he said.

Cane growers examine damage caused by deluge
Cane farmers in north Queensland say it is too early to know the extent of damage from massive, unexpected rain.
While September is supposed to be the driest month in the tropics, some farmers have received up to 665 millimetres in the Herbert River District around Ingham over the weekend.
That is 26 inches on the imperial scale.
While farmers further south would love even a fraction of that rainfall, plant scientist Ron Van Kerkwyk says it has halted the sugarcane harvest, and could have a disastrous impact on thousands of hectares of newly planted cane.
"Planting is the highest single operative cost you've got on a farm and it really is a tragedy of some proportions when we get as much rain as we've had here at this time of the year which, number one is fairly unusual and number two it's impacted by the fact that so much of the plant cane we have got is, relatively speaking, very young," he said.
In the south, where the rain is really needed, the dry conditions are starting to hurt South Australia's aquaculture industry.
A lack of typical winter weather means oysters are growing slower than normal, due to a lack of food.
Simon Turner from Turner Aquaculture at Cowell, on the Eyre Peninsula, says without wind or rain, fewer nutrients are being produced in the seawater to make algae, which is a major food source.
"When we have deep lows that come up from the Southern Ocean, [they] promote upwellings which also create algae and feed for our oysters and that's something that we haven't had much of at all this year," he said.

Survey suggests city dwellers in the dark about farms
A new Landcare survey shows more than 60 per cent of people living in the capital cities have little or no understanding of Australian farms.
It also shows that only one in three people have ever visited a farm.
Landcare commissioned the research to gauge what people know of efforts by farmers to improve the environment.
And chief executive Brian Scars Brick says the rural sector needs to do more to educate those living in urban areas.
"The worrying trend of course is that for younger people, the figure went right up to 70 per cent of people not knowing what was going on behind the farm gate," he said.

Sheep flock decreasing faster than expected
The Australian sheep flock is diminishing at a greater rate than orginially expected, according to figures just released by Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA).
The 2006 Sheep Industry Projections show the national flock has five million sheep fewer than previously thought, at around 100 million, due to the drought.
But overseas demand for Australian prime lamb is booming, with exports to Japan up 30 per cent, and the Middle East market is up by 21 per cent due to strong oil prices.
Live exports remain steady at around 4.5 million.
MLA's chief market analyst, Peter Weeks, is warning that supply will be tighter, because of the slow task of rebuilding.
"Over the next four years, instead of a 6 per cent a year rise in supply, it's going down to about 2 per cent a year," he said.

Bellamy reflects on Irwin legacy
After the shock death of naturalist and television star Steve Irwin yesterday, talk is turning to the legacy the Queenslander has left behind.
The man known as the Crocodile Hunter died after being stabbed by a sting ray barb as he filmed a documentary off the coast of far north Queensland.
British naturalist David Bellamy says he admired Steve Irwin's capacity to invest personally in the environment.

Golden spinifex could cut exploration costs
Spinifex grass might be a natural signpost to untold wealth, according to research findings in the Tanami Desert.
Scientists have discovered that spinifex plants can carry traces of gold in their leaves, if they are growing above a mineral deposit.
Further research needs to be done, but mining companies say the discovery could lead to big savings in exploration costs.
Dr Stephen Rogers from the Cooperative Research Centre for Landscape Environments and Mineral Exploration, says the grass is proving to be a natural metal detector.
"What the plant does is because it lives in very arid regions it needs to get its water from the ground water so it puts the most of its energy into creating this huge single root that penetrates very, very deeply into the regolith, into the cover of the landscape to the ground water," he said.

Herb and spice group urges research levy
The Australian Herb and Spice Industry Association wants its members to back plans for a levy to fund research and development.
At present, most research is done by growers and processors, with some funding matched by the Rural Industries and Research and Development Corporation (RIRDC).
Association chairman Robert Hayes says extra funding is needed to look at present management, marketing, and finding export destinations.
"RIRDC will continue to work with us but it has been made plain and clear that they will only do so for so long before the industry has to stand on its own two feet," he said.
"Just how long that is we haven't been given any indication, but we're not going to sit around and wait.

Vic growers plan to fight markets relocation
Victorian fruitgrowers and horticultural exporters are planning to fight plans to relocate one of Australia's biggest wholesale markets.
The State Government wants to relocate the markets from inner city Melbourne to the outer northern suburbs, because it believes the existing site is too small.
But spokesman for the growers and market users, Geoff Thomas, says the new site will be a waste of $300 million in taxpayer funding, because no one will use it.

Tariffs on Thai canned tuna, pineapple raised
Australia has imposed higher tariffs on canned tuna and pineapple from Thailand.
The level of imports of both products this year has reached the threshold to attract extra duty.

China accepts Aust citrus shipment
China has accepted Australia's first official shipment of citrus fruit.
A container of Queensland murcott mandarins have been sent overseas under strict new quarantine protocols, which include on-farm inspections and cold sterilisation.
In the past, fruit has entered China through Hong Kong.
Kevin Parr from Australian Citrus Growers says oranges from southern growing regions have not met the new protocols so far, so mandarin growers can now capitalise on the new export market.
"There's about 15 containers on the water at the moment that are going to arrive over the next fortnight, and one more going today, so I think it's a total of about 15-16 containers," he said.

Tandou exits wine industry
Dry conditions and the ongoing wine glut have forced a major agribusiness company to leave the wine industry.
Tandou is selling its 21,000 tonne winery at Monash in South Australia's Riverland, after recording a $6.1 million loss for the past financial year.
Chief executive Guy Kingwall says the company will be focusing more on its cotton business.
"Tandou obviously is facing significant challenges with the unprecedented drought area, and the flows of water in the Darling River system," he said.

Dry conditions threaten cereal crops
Ongoing dry conditions are starting to take their toll on winter cereal crops in New South Wales.
In the state's north-west farmers are already reporting failed crops, and are turning sheep and cattle into the paddocks to salvage what is left after the dry winter.
Ed Colless from the Special One Farmers Cooperative at Walgett, says crops planted on minimal moisture are starting to wither, and without substantial rain, many more will end as stock feed soon.

EPA defends Burrup gas project go-ahead
The Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) in Western Australia has defended its decision to approve the development of the Pluto Liquefied Natural Gas project on the Burrup Peninsula.
Major oil and gas producer Woodside wants to build a processing facility on the north-west peninsula, which houses what is believed to be the world's biggest collection of aboriginal rock art.
The Greens are outraged at the EPA's decision, and are calling on the state and federal governments to block the development.
But EPA chairman Wally Cox says the project is unlikely to compromise environmental or cultural objectives.
"The company has been very responsible in the way it's negotiated with the local Indigenous people," he said.
"It's changed its proposal on the way through to accommodate any concern the Aboriginal communities had.

Online shopping takes off as petrol prices remain high
High retail and petrol prices are believed to have contributed to a big jump in Internet shopping in regional Australia.
ACNeilsen figures show shopping has increased by 20 per cent in the last year alone, with almost 1.5 million country people connected to the web.
Western Queensland online shopper Janet Powne says it is more about convenience.
She lives in Bollon, which is 500 kilometres from the nearest major shopping centre.
"I just started out by mainly shopping for gifts - because we don't have a selection of gift stores that I can readily get to, I started investigating what's online and one Christmas I bought all my gifts online," she said.

Cattle, worker shortage blamed for early abattoir closure
Australia's second largest meat processor Teys Brothers is blaming a lack of cattle and a chronic labour shortage for its decision to close its abattoir in far north Queensland three-and-a-half months early.
The Innisfail meatworks normally closes for the wet season in December.
One hundred and sixty workers will be affected, and chief executive Brad Teys says the company will try to relocate them to other plants, and move cattle by train to southern abattoirs.

Competition policy 'hurting rural communities'
A new report says Australia's push to become internationally competitive has hurt the economic well-being of country communities.
Research think-tank, the Australian Farm Institute, says National Competition Policy has affected essential services and infrastructure development in country towns.
Executive director Mick Keogh says a lack of decision-making at the regional level, and confusion over state and federal policy, is not helping.
"Sometimes regional policy development seems to be aimed at increasing the population in rural centres, sometimes it seems to be aimed at bringing new industries into regional areas, sometimes it seems to be aimed at easing congestion in capital cities," he said.
"So, I think a lot of confusion exists and a lot of government packages that are called regional development packages don't seem to have a clear objective."
Federal Minister for Transport and Regional Services, Warren Truss, says the Government is committed to ensuring country towns have a full range of services.
But he says the Government expects regional communities to identify what they need themselves and then come forward with those projects.

Warmer seas could be affecting lobster catches
Victorian fisheries officers say rising sea temperatures could be one factor causing a drop in rock lobster catches off the state's west coast.
Government monitoring programs and independent surveys have found the amount of lobsters fishermen have been able to catch has dropped by 10 percent in two years.
Peter Appleford from Fisheries Victoria says it could be some time before scientists can establish whether it is due to environmental change, but some trends are emerging.
"It's been noted that the water temperatures have been higher than normal," he said.
"It's also been noted that in western Victoria there's been less frequent and weaker cold water upwellings which affect the fishery.

Overnight rain welcome but not drought-breaking
Victorian farmers say overnight rain has given dying crops a reprieve and delayed decisions to sell livestock.
More than 20 millimetres has fallen across many parts of the Wimmera Mallee, a region that has had no significant rain since July, and where reservoirs are at criticially low levels.
Farmers say this rain will not break the drought, but will keep their crops alive for another couple of weeks.
"A lot of the stubble crops I think will fire up a bit - they were nearly dead, pretty yellow, but the fallow was okay, it was just hanging on," he said.
"But mainly my stock, I can hang onto my stock.
"We can look forward I guess to two or three more weeks, then we're looking for quite a bit more rain in the springtime to finish the crops off.
"We've had 14, it'll turn it around pretty well for a couple of weeks. It was getting pretty desperate up until now.

Water market does roaring trade
The water market in southern New South Wales is doing a roaring trade, as irrigators try to secure extra water for winter crops.
Internet trading company Waterfind says there was a 10-fold increase in water movement during August, with almost 30,000 megalitres sold in the Murray and Murrumbidgee valleys.
Prices have peaked at $350 a megalitre, with the average price closer to $150.
Brett Tucker from Murrumbidgee Irrigation says after six years of drought some producers are selling water for high prices, rather than using it themselves.
"You can't blame people for selling, there's been such a differential in the markets this year that I think the Murray valley's become more attractive," he said.
"Ultimately people need to do whatever they can to get through these sort of circumstances.

Sheep producers urged to offload stock
Sheep producers in Western Australia are being urged to get rid of stock as soon as possible, because the seasonal indicators show the season is not going to improve.
With ongoing dry weather, stock numbers are already down between 25 and 50 per cent in the northern zone, but with a lack of feed, authorities say more will have to go.
Tim Wiley from the Department of Agriculture and Food says if farmers hold off too much longer, they will have to shoot stock, because it will be too expensive to get them ready for market.
"The earlier you reduce stock numbers, the less stock you'll have to get rid of," he said.

Wheat, barley forecasts drop due to dry conditions
The big dry has led the Emerald Group to dramatically lower its wheat and barley forecasts.
The commodity management company is predicting a crop of 16 million tonnes of wheat, possibly rising to 19 million under ideal spring conditions.
Barley production is expected at six million tonnes, and a canola crop of one million tonnes.
Executive director Mike Chaseling says lower wheat and barley forecasts have had a big impact on prices.
"It's been a spectacular rally here, basis levels have driven up relative to US futures dramatically in the last month or so," he said.
"Barley prices are up $60 for the month, there's been a spectacular rally here.
"Barley is trading in and around $230 a tonne, port less rail, right through most port zones in Eastern Australia and a bit higher in northern port zones.

AWB's Iraq scandal costs expected to surge
A new estimate predicts AWB's legal costs and fines associated with the Iraq wheat scandal could surge to $280 million.
Sharemarket analyst Austock says possible legal action by North American farmers and Australian shareholders, and potential fines from the Australian Tax Office and the Australia Federal Police will affect costs.
But lawyers representing North American farmers, estimate their claim alone will cost the wheat exporter $1 billion.
Atlanta lawyer Rodney Edmund says growers want to make AWB accountable for its actions.
''We're working with lawyers in Australia. We're working with lawyers in Washington DC," he said.
"Quite frankly we have lawyers in New York right now who are quite frankly ready to take a bite into this thing and obviously the only way to go up against a global, world renowned company is to have multiple multiple resources at hand doing literally a wolf pack attack on this rogue company."

Farmers to reap super change rewards
Farmers are expected to be the big winners from changes to superannuation legislation introduced to Federal Parliament this week by the Treasurer, Peter Costello.
Until next June, retiring farmers will be able to tip up to $1 million into their super schemes, to make the most of tax-free payouts available to the over-60s from July 1.
Richard Gilbert from the Investment and Financial Planning Services Association expects to see a big shift in property.
"I think there is a general feeling around the industry I work in that there will be movements of assets in order to take advantage of this," he said.
"Typically it's probably the property assets, probably the things that they'll be looking at are the lumpy assets that may well be moved.
"But those decisions have to be done carefully and with due judgement on the market, need to think twice if they're selling it off at a fire sale price."
But there are fears the changes could make it harder for managed investment schemes to attract funds.
The schemes, which include plantation timber and almond groves, have traditionally relied on tax breaks to attract support.
But Michael Spinks from the Institute of Chartered Accountants says investors might now top up their super instead.
"Prior to the changes a lot of investors probably saw agribusiness as a good way of reducing their tax," he said.

Oil price drop predicted
The price of oil is predicted to drop by almost a third within the next five years.
That is the forecast Angus Walker from chartered accountants Ernst and Young delivered to an oil conference in Perth yesterday.
He says while the US economy is slowing down due to lower domestic spending, it is being balanced out by the expanding economies of China and India.
Mr Walker says that will hold oil prices firm in the short term, before the market corrects.
"The Chinese are expected to increase their use of oil by 156 per cent by 2030, it is the largest increase of oil usage of any country in history," he said.
"In India, it's going to increase it's use of oil by around 124 per cent.

Mine to give Tiwi Is jobs boost
A new sand mine on the Tiwi Islands north of Darwin is set to boost employment for the local Aboriginal community.
Matilda Minerals will produce 200,000 tonnes of the heavy mineral concentrate, zircon-rutile over the next six years.
Managing director Bruce Maluish says he wants to reduce the environmental impact of mining an island in the Torres Strait.
"The sand averages about 4 per cent heavy mineral," he said.
"The process involves mining the sand, processing it, extracting the 5 per cent of heavy mineral and putting the sand back in the hole where it came from.
"So it's a pretty benign impact and we can be mining through areas quite quickly at low impact, and come back and rehabilitate the land quite smartly as well."

Season's first mangoes sold for $25,000
Hundreds of greengrocers packed the Sydney Produce Markets this morning for the annual charity auction of the season's first box of mangoes.
The 12 mangoes, from Pine Creek Plantation in the Northern Territory, sold for $25,000, with the money to be donated to the Westmead Children's Hospital.
The buyer, Fred Piscuineri, says the hospital will also need to get the kids' cutlery out for a surprise dessert today.
"I think we're going to go to the Westmead Hospital like we did two years ago and give them to those poor kids that are in the hospital," he said.

Online dating on the rise in regions
Yesterday we heard about a boom in online shopping in regional Australia, and it now seems that more country men and women are finding love on the web as well.
Fiona Thomas runs the online dating site Rural Romeos, and says in the past 12 months there has been a 50 per cent increase in online dating.
She says access to the Internet has reduced isolation, which in the past has caused loneliness and depression.
"They're pretty fair dinkum about it," she said.
"Mainly in the marriage age bracket sort of from 25 but right up to 40 - 45, that may have been married and this is second time around.

Song played for Makybe Diva to make beautiful music
There is more than a touch of romance in the multi-million dollar thoroughbred breeding season this year in the Hunter Valley.
It is one of the region's biggest seasons, with bookings for nearly 100 proven stallions.
Among them, has been the highly anticipated joining of Melbourne Cup champion Makybe Diva and the emerging stallion Gallileo.
And, to add that special touch, Stud manager Peter O'Brien says owner Tony Santic asked for the Diva's favourite song to get her in the mood.
"We had candles outside her stable, and we had Deborah Conway's It's Only the Beginning, was the song chosen to bring the romantic side on.
"That was seemingly her song they used to play to her in the stables.
"And we had all her colours around her stable.

WA grain growers look to the skies
Grain growers in WA's south-east who are generally enjoying a reasonable season say they are now in need of good rain to see crops finish well.
Farmers from all over the agricultural region are gathering in Newdegate 450 kilometres south east of Perth, for the town's annual machinery field days.
After floods swept through the region in January, and a very late start, local farmer Trevor de Landgrafft says farmers are now relying heavily on rain in coming months.
"I think the October rain's going to be the most important for the district," he said.

River pumping allowed in Bourke
The New South Wales Government has allowed horticultural irrigators in the outback community of Bourke to pump emergency water supplies out of the dwindling Darling River.
The Bourke region has been suffering drought conditions for more than five years, and irrigators are battling to keep citrus trees, grape vines and hojoba plants alive.
Phil Mansell from Back of Bourke Fruits says tough decision are being made about whether to let crops die, with no guarantee of future water flows.
"We have a grape crop there that we have to now make the decision, will we have the water to take that crop through into a harvest?" he said.
"It's a further million dollar investment to do the work to grow that crop, and the easiest thing to do is just to turn the water off a significantly large area of vines.
"But the financiers are facing a terrible dilemma, they are considering what does that do to the community, what does it do to jobs in town et cetera?"

Feed grain users move to import
The Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) has confirmed that some feed grain users are looking to import stocks for the first time since 2002.
AQIS, which approves import permits, says it has had casual discussions with users, but no formal application has been lodged.
Grain is imported when Australia's supply is low and domestic prices are dearer than international prices.
Elders general manager of grains, Phillip Pyle, says while prices are not high enough to justify importing yet, they have moved up rapidly in the past month.
"Prices are up pretty dramatically," he said.

NSW irrigators saved from huge tax compo bill
New South Wales irrigators who won a $100 million compensation package after losing access to ground water will no longer lose a big part of the money in tax.
Fourteen hundred irrigators received money to compensate them for a move to claim back over-allocated ground water resources.
The Federal Government had treated the payments as income, and demanded tax be paid.
Prime Minister John Howard has now intervened, saying the money is compensation and should not be taxed.
But Federal Member for Gwydir, John Anderson, admits not all payments will be tax-free.
"If it's a pre-85 asset, which most of them would be, there's no tax," he said.

Govt working to clear 457 visa hold-ups
The Federal Government says it is trying to fix problems with the temporary skilled migration program, which have halted visa applications since April.
Under the 457 program, skilled workers are being imported to fill labour shortages, particularly in the meat industry.
But visa applications have been held up, after claims some sectors of the industry have breached the terms of the agreement.
Immigration Minister, Senator Amanda Vanstone, says a new labour agreement is being put together, which will clearly define worker skills.
"What I think has been happening is people have been bringing in people described as slaughtermen and butchers and they have been doing boning and slicing work which is inconsistent with the visa as it's constructed now," she said.

RSPCA angry at piggery raid
An animal rights raid on a New South Wales piggery has met with anger from the RSPCA.
The piggery near Young was raided in July, where video footage of the raid was gathered.
The footage has only just been sent to police, with allegations about animal cruelty surrounding sow pens.
Chief executive of the New South Wales branch of the RSPCA, Bernie Murphy, says extremists should be stopped from entering properties.
"They go onto a property, they breach the biosecurity, they may visit great harm on the well-being of the animals plus of course they are having an impact on people's livelihoods.
"No one would tolerate someone invading someone's house and this is similar to that in a business sense.
"These people believe because they have the moral high ground in their mind, they can go onto properties, break the law, ignore it.

Mine company ordered to pay former exec compo
A Western Australian mining company has been ordered to pay more than $1.8 million to a former senior executive, after failing to disclose a nickel discovery.
The Supreme Court of Western Australia yesterday awarded the money to Kim Riley, a former managing director and shareholder of Jubilee Mines.
In late 1994, rival company Western Mining Corporation told Jubilee Mines it had inadvertently found the nickel deposit on Jubilee's tenement in the northern goldfields.
However Jubilee Mines did not publicly provide information of the find until two years later.
In that time, Mr Riley sold his entire holding in the company.
He says he would have been in a different position about selling the shares if he had known about the discovery.
"I've got mixed emotions, I am very relieved," he said.
"It was a stressful period for myself, also for my wife and children, I'm glad that it's over."

Human error 'probable cause' of GM canola mix-up
Human error has been identified as the most likely cause of the genetically-modified contamination of conventional canola two years ago.
Low level contamination of the commercially-grown 'grace' variety was discovered in 2005 during routine sampling of canola exports.
A trial of GM canola was conducted in Tasmania in 1998, and a year later grace canola was grown on a separate site three kilometres away, but an investigation by the Office of the Gene Technology Regulator has found that is not how the contamination occured.
Alex Schaap from Tasmania's Department of Primary Industry says there is not enough evidence to provide a definite answer.
"The mystery still remains as to what the source of the contamination is," he said.
"The only hypothesis left standing is some form of human error, perhaps something as simple as somebody not labelling seed bags correctly, and seed hence being mixed."
The peak grains research body says it is continuing negotiations to try to secure the commercial release of genetically modified crops.
The Grains Research and Development Corporation is funding research into GM canola, which cannot be released to farmers because of state-imposed bans on the technology.
Chairman Terry Enright says the benefits of GM crops, such as disease tolerant wheat and barley, need to be proven.
"We're positively working with industry and with governments in a dialogue to make sure that we overcome these issues that are there," he said.
"And we're hopeful in the long term that if crops become available and can be assessed on a crop by crop basis, if they demonstrate benefit to the industry, that ultimately we'll be able to grow them, if that is what is required."
Meanwhile, Nufarm has bought the licence to develop and commercialise genetically-modified canola.
The agribusiness company has paid $10 million for Monsanto's Roundup Ready canola licence and germ plasm.

Inland rail link inches forward
The Federal Government says a new inland rail network linking Brisbane and Melbourne will need to be built, to cope with growing freight demand on road and existing rail networks.
Transport Minister Warren Truss has released a 15-month study into the project, and says the far western sub-corridor is the top contender from four routes named in the report.
The project will cost more than $3 billion, and taxpayers will need to contribute two thirds.
The Federal Government wants the line to be in operation by 2019.
Minister Truss says there will be consultation on the best route, but one is a particular stand-out.
"Now that particular corridor would cost about 3.1 billion dollars to build and achieve a transit time of just under 21 hours," he said.

Dairy industry pledges $15m to fighting fund
A new national Dairy Innovation Centre has been tasked with finding ways to compete with the growing soy milk market.
Seven milk companies have pledged $15 million to the centre, which will be based on Melbourne's outskirts.
Dairy farmers have also contributed, through the levies they pay to Dairy Australia.
Chairman Andrew Donovan says the research into new milk products will help farmers.
"We'll be looking at protecting their price, their milk price, we live in a very competitive environment both as a dairy industry but also dairy industry competing with other food products such as soy, and so this is really a protection strategy," he said.

Govt under fire over delay in delivering horticulture conduct code
Labor and the Greens have attacked the Federal Government for delays in implementing a code of conduct for the horticulture sector.
It has been almost 700 days since the Coalition made an election promise to introduce a mandatory code to improve transparency between growers and wholesalers.
A motion put forward yesterday by the Greens in the Senate, to clarify when the issue will be addressed, was narrowly defeated by the Coalition.
Greens Senator Christine Milne says that is a clear sign the Government is trying to renege on its promise.
"It's an absolute disgrace that they are now trying to find a way to make it some sort of rambling voluntary code," she said.
"The Greens believe that it should be a mandatory code, that's why we moved in the Senate to call on the Government to fulfil their election promise and what we're seeing is delay until after the Queensland election and I can almost bet my bottom dollar that they will come out with some gobbledly-gook about some voluntary codes next week."
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran is defending the delay.
"I realise there's great anger growing amongst many who believe that the mandatory code of conduct would be automatically be introduced, we're still working our way through all of the issues," he said.

AWB in bidding war to supply wheat to Indian company
AWB is one of four companies left in a bidding war to supply 1.6 million tonnes of milling wheat to the State Trading Company of India.
Swiss-based company, Glencore, is known to have lodged the highest tender, at 650,000 tonnes, with AWB offering 630,000 tonnes.

US beef exports get green light to South Korea
South Korea has agreed to readmit beef exports from the US.
Australia's share of the market has grown by 120 per cent since US beef was banned in 2004, and is now worth $600 million.
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) says the resumption of the American beef trade could cut the value of our exports by more than 20 per cent.
South Korea's Agriculture Ministry has just announced that 36 US slaughterhouses designated to handle meat for export to South Korea met required safety measures, clearing the last hurdle to the resumption of imports.
MLA Korean manager, Glen Feist says the Americans have had a tough time convincing the Koreans to accept meat with bone chip fragment.
"The protocol is no bones, but everybody knows in our industry that from time to time you do get bone chips on the primal cuts of beef through boning problems, especially in the biggest US plants," he said.

Govt rejects call to dump freight equalisation scheme
The Federal Government has dismissed calls to scrap Tasmania's freight equalisation scheme.
Under the scheme, Tasmanian producers receive a rebate on freight to offset the high cost of shipping across Bass Straight.
A draft report just released by the Productivity Commission says the scheme is too costly and should be phased out.
But the Government says the program will stay, a move welcomed by president of the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association, Roger Swan.
"I think the PM has put the matter to rest for now, but I think what we do see from this is that politicians of all shapes, sizes and colours understand that this is a vital issue for Tasmania's industry and it's an issue that we have to keep certainly our finger on," he said.

US resumption of beef exports to Japan slower than expected
The US has only shipped 100 tonnes of beef to Japan, after regaining access to the market a month ago.

Australian dollar falls again amid low metal prices
The Australian dollar has fallen for the fourth consecutive day on the back of low precious and base metal prices.
The price of gold has dropped to around $US616 an ounce, in the biggest drop in seven weeks and a far cry from the month of May when it was trading at $US732.
The net effect is to drag down the Australian dollar, which is closely linked to mineral commodity performance.

CSR shares plunge down by 10 pc
Shares in Australia's biggest sugar milling company have crashed almost 10 per cent in a day, after a downgrade in its profit forecast.
CSR Ltd produces 40 per cent of Australia's sugar from seven mills in North Queensland.
The company has told the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX) that falling sugar prices and a wet harvest have forced it to reverse earlier predictions that earnings would be up 10 ten per cent.

Canegrowers want mandatory levies to curb smut spread
The Queensland Canegrowers organisation wants a national mandatory grower levy to fund efforts to stop the spread of sugarcane smut.
The fungal disease was found almost three months ago near Childers, in Queensland's south-east.
Although a proposed national cost-sharing plan has already been knocked back, the sugar industry says it wants a compulsory levy to raise about $9 million.
But Joe Russo from Isis Canegrowers admits there is still a lot of work to be done.
"We've got to now get New South Wales canegrowers to come on board," he said.
"They've agreed in principle, we've got to get the Ord River - but the other thing we've got to do is - the Federal Government now has got to put mechanisms in place that we need to be able to strike this levy on all cane growing in the Australian sugar industry."

Agriculture research process under scrutiny
Pressure is on Australia's agricultural research and development corporations (RDCS) to justify how they spend taxpayer dollars.
The chairs of 14 peak bodies have been meeting in Canberra this week.
Parliamentary secretary for Agriculture, Sussan Ley, wants more collaboration between the agencies, and a uniform way of assessing whether their research work is up to scratch.
"I'm waiting for them to come back to me with that, but I certainly don't want it to be a long process," she said.
"I want it to be an efficient process, I want it to be realistic and I want it to produce answers for people who have every right to ask the question, 'are we getting value for money?' - it's important to recognise that governments are really a major stakeholder in the RDC's.

Drought-stricken farmers disappointed with Govt response
Victorian farmers facing water shortages say are disappointed with the State Government's latest plan to tackle the drought.
Premier Steve Bracks will head up a task force to consider how to deal with the drought and lack of water, and has announced more funding for rural financial counselling services.
Mallee farmer Claire Cook has had to sell most of her sheep, and says most of her crops have died.
"It's a very political, very politician's response, as in, 'we'll have a look and we'll have a discussion about it'," she said.
"I was hoping for something a bit more practical, as in some subsidies, maybe for some tanks that we're all going to have to buy in order for the water, hopefully that will be carted to us, or that we'll cart ourselves.

Wool broker raises concerns about stock feed supplies
A Western Australian wool broker says talk of importing feed into Australia for livestock has left him wondering where it is going to come from.
Desperate areas of the state received boosting rains overnight, but there is still growing concern about how stock will be fed in the coming months.
Trevor Pedlar from Primaries of WA says he has travelled through much of the state recently and there is going to be a need to purchase feed to keep stock on farm.
But he says the cost and availability of imported feed will be an issue.
"Things are tough in a lot of areas around the world," he said.
"Secondly would be the cost. Because you're looking at commodity prices from the sheep industry at the moment, they're not good.

Top price ram sells for $21,000
Despite ongoing dry conditions, average prices rose to around $3,700 at yesterday's ram sale at the Royal Adelaide Show.
The top price ram from the Nyowee Stud at Balaklava sold for $21,000.
Peter Meyer, who brought the ram in partnership with two others, says interest from South American buyers shored up the prices.
"Prices paid in the past, many years ago, when the wool industry was booming and semen sales first started to come into vogue, probably over-valued some rams," he said.

Vets lobby for mandatory attendance at outback rodeos
Vets in the Northern Territory are calling for their attendance to be mandatory at all outback rodeos.
The call was prompted after a horse stumbled and broke its leg at an event earlier this year where a vet was not present.
However some rodeo organisers, like Rod Haines of Pine Creek, say there are not enough vets and the cost would be prohibitive.
"The stock people up here that work these rodeos, work the stock every day and they know what is ill and what's not ill and I think it's up to their judgement to keep it that way," he said.
"They don't want to put sick animals out there in front of the audience and it doesn't make the sport look good.
"If you are going to have a vet at rodeo's you would need a vet at every sport that involves animals and that includes pigeon races, cane toad races, pony club, gymkhana's, camp drafting."
The Australian Veterinary Association has spent the last two years working on a rodeo policy that requires the attendance of a vet.
The Australian Professional Rodeo Association has a code of conduct that involves vets in rodeo as optional.
The NCCAW has created a national rodeo code of practice to protect the welfare of animals.

Farmer hopes for prosthesis for three-legged cow
You may have seen a three-legged dog or even a three-legged cat, but what about a three-legged cow?
Tasmanian dairy farmer Geoff Heazlewood was devastated when he recently found one of his best cows had broken her leg after falling in a river.
It turned out amputation was the only option and he says while the is cow recovering well, she could do with some extra help getting around.
"I would dearly love to hear from somebody that was used to making prostheses and we could perhaps put a prosthesis on her," he said.

AWH renews Yennora lease
The future of wool sales in Sydney looks more secure, after a decision by Australian Wool Handlers to renew its lease on the Yennora selling centre.
The new five-year agreement will take effect from July 2007, with AWH to lease two thirds of the current space, including the auction rooms, administration offices and the container handling area.

Industry levy vote for dairy farmers
Dairy Australia is calling for farmers to increase their support for research and development when an industry levy is put to the vote early next year.
Many farmers have voiced disappointment with the performance of the peak industry body at recent meetings to discuss the levy.
Dairy Australia's John McKew says the organisation needs to communicate better, but says its vital investment continues.
"I would suggest that some of the concerns have been that there is probably a lack of understanding or appreciation from a large number of dairy farmers about where their dairy service levy is invested from Dairy Australia," he said.

Gold milling resumes at Pine Creek
In resources news, gold is again being milled at Pine Creek in the Northern Territory, after three years.
Blasting starts today at the high grade, underground Brock's Creek mine, but GBS Gold is already milling old stockpiles to check the machinery.
Operations manager Tom Heaton expects to initially process 1.5 million tonnes of ore every year, recovering 150,000 ounces of gold.
"The mainstays of this operation for 10 years are two main projects, one of which is Maud Creek which is the refractory material, that has a life of around about ten years," he said.

Cold fronts bring rain to north WA
A series of cold fronts has brought good rains to much of Western Australia's parched farming and pastoral regions.
Falls have even reached areas of the Pilbara in the state's north, not known to receive rain at this time of year.
Further south in agricultural regions, crops and pastures have been given a healthy boost with falls of between 10 and 30 millimetres over drought-affected areas of the eastern and central wheatbelt.
Mukinbudin farmer Chris Geraghty says the rain has been enough to bring some crops back to life and will improve pastures.
"Feed's been pretty good early on because of the summer rain but the last few weeks, it's starting to go off a bit," he said.

Grain harvest contractors urge drought assistance
Contract grain harvesters want the Federal Government to consider exceptional circumstances drought assistance as they go into another tough season.
The Australian Grain Harvesters Association says some contractors have seen their incomes drop by 50 per cent because of a run of reduced crops in recent years.
Association president Peter Bradley says some members are offloading machinery, while others have had equipment repossessed.
"In the last five years in particular we've been in drought in most states," he said.
"And in Western Australia, it's the first time it's facing its worst drought, and there's very little crop over there at all, and the machinery companies and their finance companies have been being very patient with pretty-much everybody for the last five years.

Global warming faster than thought: ANU expert
A leading climate change scientist says there is a high risk temperatures are rising at a more rapid rate than experts predicted five years ago.
Will Steffen from the Australian National University says increased warming of the earth is preventing the land's natural absorption of carbon and that is enhancing the problem.
He says the last major international climate outlook paper predicted temperatures would rise by between 2 and 2.5 degrees by the end of the century.

Timber industry opposes tax break changes
The timber industry wants the Federal Government to reject the latest push to scale back tax breaks for managed investment schemes.
Assistant Treasurer Peter Dutton is believed to be pushing for a cap on tax deductions for investors in timber plantations.
Currently investors in the forestry sector receive a 100 per cent tax deduction, available during the first year they contribute.
Andrew White from Forest Enterprises Australia says the industry opposes any changes.
"If it falls within the general framework that we're aware of I don't think there will be any surprises," he said.

Agforce chief expresses Qld vote concerns
Queensland's rural leaders have expressed disappointment with the Beattie Government's big win at the weekend's state election.
Despite the double crisis confronting Queensland's health system and water supply, Peter Beattie has won 59 seats, a huge majority of 33 in the 89-member Parliament.
The blood-letting is under way in the Opposition parties, with National Party leader Lawrence Springborg possibly to be replaced by his deputy Jeff Seeney.
Afgorce CEO Brett de Hayr says many people in the rural sector would have liked to have seen a more balanced Parliament elected.
"It just showed that people probably thought Labor was the less worse option on the day," he said.
"I don't think there were any resounding signs of support for anyone in this campaign."

S Korea lifts US beef ban
The US beef industry is hoping to make big inroads into South Korea, in the wake of a decision to lift a two-and-a-half year export ban.
Meat and Livestock Australia has already warned that the value of Australian beef exports could fall by up to 20 per cent.
While struggling to regain market share in Japan, the National Cattlemen's Beef Association (NCBA) expects an easier time in Korea.
NCBA trade adviser Greg Doud calls Korea a "very different situation" to Japan, which turned largely to Australian beef after mad cow disease was first found in the US.
"Korea had over a year's worth of US beef in frozen storage, after December the 23rd, 2003," he said.
"And they kept right on moving through that product.
"What we've consistently heard in Korea, is the fact that, once those restaurants and retailers ran out of US beef, they were clamouring for the stuff."

Demand grows for environmentally friendly export meat
Pressure is growing for sheep farmers to demonstrate their green credentials, particularly to export markets.
New research in the lamb industry has found demand for environmentally friendly meat is higher overseas than locally.
Sheepmeat researcher with the Department of Primary Industries in Victoria, Nick Linden, says surveys found a growing number of shoppers want to know whether a farm is environmentally accredited.
"We certainly had a stronger response that there were more market opportunities at the moment today in the export market than there was in the domestic markets," he said.

PETA takes live export fight to Middle East
The animal rights group, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), is targetting Middle Eastern consumers in its latest campaign against Australia's live export trade.
The US-based group is paying for newspaper advertisements in Jordan, Kuwait and member nations of the United Arab Emirates, highlighting conditions on board ships used to transport sheep to the region.
PETA spokeswoman Maya Linden says the group wants to pressure the Australian Government to stop the trade, and hopes to influence lamb consumers in the Middle East as well.
"More and more Muslims are telling us that these things that are happening to the sheep are not only horribly cruel, but they also violate Islamic principles and are not Halal," she said.

Fruit, veg code of conduct plans revealed
The Federal Government has unveiled plans for a voluntary code of conduct for the fruit and vegetable industry.
Growers wanted a mandatory code, which was originally promised by the Government before the last election.
The Government says the new code will be legally enforceable, and provide transparency to growers.
But John Roach from grower group Ausveg, is disappointed.
"I think the underpinning side of all this is good business practice and one of the things about the mandatory code, as originally proposed, was that it would be about good business practice," he said.
"Any watering down of that is a concern, however if this is the way forward then we give it a damn good shot, as an outcome, hopefully other people will bring the same goodwill to the table."
Growers and wholesalers will meet later this week to begin work on the code, with a draft expected by November.
But Federal Industry Minister, Ian Macfarlane, says a mandatory code would have been too onerous.

Iron ore ship runs aground in Port Hedland
An iron ore ship has run aground at Australia's largest tonnage port at Port Hedland in WA's Pilbara region.
The 290-metre long vessel "Creciente" ran aground after breaking its moorings while loading ore in the early hours of this morning.
Port Hedland resident Vic Watson says tidal conditions are creating problems for the full carrier.
"It was like a big bang woke us up, like someone belting a big empty drum with a sledge hammer," he said.
"And then there was lots of pushing and pulling with tugs and then the next thing they actually pulled the ship back probably three of four hundred metres into the harbour.
"Then the next thing they brought it back out to where it is now where it's stopped.

Top WA property 'Grange' changes hands
One of Western Australia's top properties has been sold for between $20 million and $30 million.
The 10,000 acre Grange, at Dongara on the west coast, dates back to 1853, and was most recently owned by the late construction giant John Roberts and his family.
Real estate agent Stephen Vaughan says there was big interest in the merino sheep stud, which was eventually sold to the Stoney family, which has extensive holdings elsewhere in the state.
"It certainly went somewhere between 20 and 30 million," he said.
"We're dealing with a property that's fairly special and in Western Australian terms it's probably up there in the top 10 per cent of general farming.

Indigenous rangers push for sea rights
A push for Indigenous sea rights is growing in the Northern Territory.
Charged with caring for their traditional lands, some Indigenous ranger groups are now asking for authority over their saltwater country.
Grace Daniels is with the Ngukurr Rangers near the Gulf of Carpentaria and says they want the right to stop over-fishing and illegal fishing.
"We know our land more than the European," he said.
"We know what's in the sea and what's in the land. It's very hard for us to make people understand that's our land.

Tas restaurateurs struggle to buy local fish
Tasmanian restaurants are finding it hard to buy local fish, with high operating costs forcing vessels out of the industry.
Fishermen are now choosing to sell the smaller catch to mainland markets at a premium price, rather than supply local restaurants.
And with more fishermen preparing to leave the sector under a Federal Government licence buy-back, Will Mure from Mure's Fishing in Hobart says the trend will continue.
"I guess it's just coming terms with the fact that the fishing industry is going through some fairly serious changes right now and that the price of local quality produce, you'll have to pay a premium price for it," he said.

Dollar strength threatens asparagus viability
The high Australian dollar is threatening to force even more asparagus growers out of business this harvest.
Asparagus is sold into the key Japanese market in yen, meaning that as the value of the Australian dollar strengthens, growers are getting less and less money for the same amount of produce.
Sean Lembrey from Australia's largest asparagus exporter Momack Produce says an asparagus glut here in Australia is not out of the question.
"At the moment it's profitable right now but we are at the very beginning of our season," he said.

Dry conditions prompt early fire work
Forestry companies in South Australia have started fire prevention work nearly a month early, due to the dry conditions.
Forestry SA, which manages around 130 hectares of softwood plantations and native forest, has begun work on firebreaks, cleared internal tracks and trained extra crew.
Spokesman Rick Underdown says the potential for bush fires is extremely high, especially in the native forests.
"We are particularly worried about that because low rainfall means that the soils are still relatively dry and the fuels in the native forests, that's the litter on the ground and the dead matter just above that, dries out at the same rate as the soils," he said.

