Govt looks to hot rocks power potential
The Victorian Government hopes hot granite rocks found underground will become a new source of green energy.
The rocks heat water pumped into the ground, turning it into steam, which is then used to create power.
The State Government has released 31 exploration permits across the state.
Oil industry consultant Terry Donohoe says the interest in hot rocks as a source of geothermal energy is growing.
"We know that Japan has got hot rocks and no other form of energy so the Japanese are very interested," he said.
"Also of course in South Australia, and recently the Queensland Government let out some exploration permits.

Urban dog owners take lead in sheepdog trials
City dog owners are starting to replace retired farmers on the sheepdog trial circuit.
The experts say they have noticed a big change, with city pet owners more interested in putting their dog and three sheep through an obstacle course, than competing in a traditional dog show.
Seven-time Australian representative Malcolm Taylor says while sheepdogs are being used less on the land, their popularity in the cities is growing.
"But I think the future for dog trialing is going to alter quite a bit and you'll see far more city dwellers that'll have a working dog in the city," he said.

Iraq finalises wheat purchase
The Iraqi Grains Board says it has finalised a $100 million wheat purchase from Australia after almost two months of negotiations.
Although the three companies selling the wheat say they have not yet signed a contract, the Grains Council of Australia believes terms have been agreed.
The head of the Iraq Grains Board Khalil Aassi has told reporters the country will buy 350,000 tonnes of wheat at $190 a tonne from the Wheat Australia consortium.
The deal was brokered by Trade Minister Mark Vaile, who visited Baghdad in February to save the Iraq wheat trade, after it announced it would no longer deal with monopoly exporter AWB because of the oil-for-food kickbacks scandal.
The deal with Wheat Australia, which includes ABB, GrainCorp and Cooperative Bulk Handling, breaks AWB's hold over wheat exports.
But the Grains Council's David Ginns says the deal will not be a lucrative one.
"As we know, time costs money and they certainly spent a lot of time and money on finalising this deal," he said.
Australia has traditionally supplied around a quarter of Iraq's wheat, making it Australia's third largest wheat market.

Critical months
Wheat exporter AWB says the next few months are critical for the global grain market, as weather conditions determine the size of the world crop.
Australian growers have already received a lower than expected return on the 2005-06 crop, largely due to fluctuating demands for hard wheat varieties and tough international marketing conditions.
And general manager of AWB International, Sarah Scales, says global demand remains subdued.
"I think the next couple of months are very critical, I think it's make or break as far as the world wheat market goes for the next 12 months, depending on particularly rain conditions in the hard red winter wheat belt of the United States," she said.

Graincorp to close 100 silos
Grain handling company Graincorp has confirmed it will close around 100 silos in the eastern states as part of a company restructure.
As the major grain handler for the eastern states, Graincorp currently maintains 320 silo sites but now plans to close almost a third.
Queensland will lose 23, Victoria 32, with 38 to go in New South Wales.
Workers at the silos were told about the closures yesterday, but were also told their jobs were safe.
Graincorp says the changes are in line with what growers want, which is better rates on rail services and a trend to using larger full-service silos.
Rodeo organisers in Tasmania say they will not call off a national titles competition this weekend despite vandals destroying an arena.
Only days ago the power box at the Harveydale Rodeo Arena was smashed to pieces and some time in the past 48 hours vandals entered the private property with wire cutters and shredded the perimeter fence.
Rodeo Tasmania claims the offenders were people driven to action by a high-profile campaign against rodeo's in recent times.
That campaign has been spearheaded by Against Animal Cruelty Tasmania, which says it had nothing with the vandalism but concedes their campaign may have spurred others into action.
"The public see what goes on at events they wouldn't normally go to but somebody out there may have been compelled to take direct action after they've seen disturbing footage that we've ween on television," spokeswoman Emma Haswell said.

Money flows at Easter yearling sales
The Easter yearling sales in Sydney have had a record $43 million opening day.
Seven horses sold for more than $1 million each, with a top price of $2 million for a colt by Redoute's Choice.
The horse will be trained by David Hayes in Victoria.
Jonathon Darcy from William Inglis and Son says the buoyant world economy has seen an increase in overseas buyers.
"The strength of the stock market in both Tokyo and in Hong Kong has really driven this in the last 12 to 18 months," he said.
"Five years ago both of those economies were under a fair bit of pressure following the SARS outbreak.

Feed running low on stock routes
The long paddock is getting crowded around Narrabri, in north-west New South Wales, where 25,000 head of livestock are searching for feed on the stock routes.
Twelve thousand cattle and 13,000 sheep have been on the road in recent weeks, with the routes almost at full capacity.
Jamie Maddox from the Narrabri Rural Lands Protection Board, says it will be a harsh winter for many graziers already short of feed and water.
"We received some good late January/early February rain, which gave us a good body of feed but it's almost all disappeared now and it's certainly becoming dry," he said.
"A few dams in certain areas are drying up quickly and becoming boggy.

'Pressure on negotiators' to secure better market access
Sheepmeat producers are confident their latest round of talks with the European Commission will lead to a bigger slice of the export market for Australia.
Industry delegates have met with EU commissioners in Brussels to push Australia's case ahead of world trade talks later this month.
Ian Feldtman from the Sheepmeats Council says the pressure is now on trade negotiators to clinch a deal.
"The message we're giving to our Government is that the decisions that are made during this round is something that our industry is going to have to live with for at least the next 10 years," he said.

Aust to increase agricultural aid to East Timor
Australia's direct involvement in rebuilding East Timor with agricultural aid is set to increase.
The Australian Ambassador to East Timor says more than $40 million will be invested in aid this year, with agriculture representing $1.5 million.
Margaret Twomey says a new proposal aims to improve water harvesting and sanitation for remote communities across the rugged nation.
"And we are now in talks with the Government and specifically the Prime Minister about a much bigger, more ambitious program, that would last up to 10 years, cost somewhere up to $50 million, to get clean water and sanitation to 80 per cent of the people in this country," she said.

Texas weather could impact on Aust cotton prices
Prolonged dry conditions in the American state of Texas could see a lift in cotton prices in Australia.
A global oversupply of cotton and the high Australian dollar are hurting returns for growers at present, with prices well below $400 a bale.
But Cliff White from Queensland Cotton says if the situation in the United States deteriorates, prices for next season could rise above $430 a bale.
"I think it's difficult to see significant change to current crop prices, however over the next few weeks attention is going to be turning more so to the new crop production prospects in the northern hemisphere and at the moment there are one or two concerns on the horizon," he said.

Fruit fly outbreak could affect Tas market access
A fruit fly outbreak has been detected at the Northern Territory's largest table grape producer.
The central Australian town of Ti-Tree reported an isolated outbreak last month but recent tests now show the pest has spread to nearby Territory Grapes.
Horticulture advisory officer Geoff Kenna says the finding could affect market access to Tasmania.

Apple packhouse set for $2m upgrade
Australia's biggest apple packhouse is launching a multi-million dollar upgrade.
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran will unveil the $2 million upgrade of the Batlow Fruit Co-operative in southern NSW which features Australia's first automatic blemish sorting system for apples.
The technology has been imported from New Zealand and second grade fruit is identified electronically and then removed from the premium packing line.
It is expected to increase its efficiency.
The grower-owned co-operative was established in 1922 and produces 6,000 bins of apples each year.
The district's growers are suffering after prices fell last year under the weight of a big crop and imported apple juice.
It is well recognised that the gap between city-slickers and their country cousins is growing.
But farmers are out to restore their image by holding a National Farm Day next month.
Victorian wool producer Debbie Bain says farm gates will be opened to city people to help them better understand decisions made on a working property.
"If we have somebody up here and we are bringing sheep into drench them, why do we give them these chemicals? We're shoving these chemicals down their throats, what for?" she said.
"But when you explain about worm burden and and the detrimental [effect] that worms have on sheep, they'll suddenly understand a little bit more about chemical use in animals."

Drought program speeds up aid applications
Farmers will get faster access to drought assistance under new changes unveiled by state and federal agriculture ministers today.
They are the first in a raft of drought assistance changes farmers hope to see over the next six months.
The National Agricultural Monitoring System (NAMS) is expected to slash the time it takes to gather the information farmers need to lodge a drought assistance application.
It will provide instant online rainfall, soil moisture, crop yield and commodity price information, streamlining contact between farmers and local, state and federal governments.
Vice-president of the National Farmers Federation (NFF) Charles Burke says there needs to be fundamental change to the way drought assistance is delivered but this is a positive first step that will help farmers.
"It'll really give an overall picture of say one particular region and how it's performing in a drought," he said.

Money laundering law changes 'draconian'
Rural bank branches and agencies could be under threat from proposed changes to federal money laundering legislation.
While the laws are designed to target organised crime, a report by the Chartered Secretaries of Australia says it will be too hard for many smaller bank agencies to comply.
Chief executive Tim Sheehy says banks will need to have personal contact with clients, there will be changes to identification requirements and big fines.
"They are draconian, they're unfortunately a one size fits all approach," he said.
"The way that the proposed legislation is, there's no difference in penalties for a fairly minor transgression or a major $10 million one if you're an agent.
"[When] you're faced with the risk of a major penalty for a small error, you're probably going to pull out of the business."

Truck drivers 'living below poverty line'
New research shows the families of truck drivers are suffering from record fuel prices, drought and long working hours.
More than 70 per cent of the nation's transport fleet is made up of small operators and the report by the Transport Women of Australia Association says tough times are being felt everywhere.
Spokeswoman Pam McMillan says the study backs up anecdotal evidence.
"We did find that some operators are living below the poverty line and more than what we would like to consider," she said.
"They might have a nice house but perhaps can't afford to buy decent groceries every week and it's not that they're being frivolous, it's just that the money's not out there.

Debate intensifies about fuel alternatives as oil prices rise
Oil prices are not getting any better with the price of West Texas crude jumping again last night to $US72 a barrel.
As prices go up, debate is intensifying about fuel alternatives.
Bruce Robinson from the Association for the Study of Peak Oil and Gas says Australia could halve its transport fuel usage by minimising its dependence on cars.
He says fuel taxes should be increased similar to the system introduced by former prime minister Margaret Thatcher in United Kingdom in the 1980s.
"If we continue to provide very cheap petrol and to give excise free petrol to everyone and subsidise it as happens in Queensland then we are just going to continue down the oil dependence [road]," he said.
"The enormous legacy Margaret Thatcher has left to Britain, she's given the price signals that oil is going to be more expensive then they are not nearly so dependent on cheap fuel as we are."
The higher price of crude oil is causing investors to take a closer look at the biofuels industry.
A new ethanol plant opens in the US every 10 days and around the world millions of dollars are being poured into biofuel projects to reduce dependence on oil.
Agribusiness investment adviser Shane Kelly says Australian investors are also keen to back a local ethanol industry.
"It's fair to say that as oil prices increase, the interest in ethanol plants has increased markedly," he said.

Cyclone causes minor damage
There has been big rainfall in the wake of cyclone Monica in far north Queensland.
The category three cyclone cross the north-east coast late yesterday but does not appear to have caused too much damage.
Cyclone Monica followed almost exactly the same path as cyclone Ingrid which ripped through the region about 13 months ago.
Monica hit land just south of the Lockhart Aboriginal community.
Very few commercial fishing boats were sheltering in Lockhart River's mangroves and so far there has been no reports of major incidents.
On cattle properties in the cyclone's path the strong winds brought down some branches, trees, sheds and fences but overall damage has been minor.
Tom Burns manages Orchid Creek station and he says his biggest problem was finding his dogs.

Wheat bug discovery prompts questions
Australian apple growers say the discovery of the wheat bug in Holland and Belgium raises new questions about the risks posed by New Zealand apple imports.
Biosecurity Australia is considering 34 submissions on the proposal to allow kiwi apples into Australia.
Chairman of Apple and Pear Australia Darral Ashton says the wheat bug is endemic in New Zealand and should be given greater consideration.
"News out of both Belgium and Holland that that wheat bug has been found and they are saying it arrived hitchhiking on New Zealand apples or New Zealand apple packaging," he said.
"Whether that's true or not I don't know but it just highlights the concern that one of the processes has to be fumigation because while wheat bug may not affect the Batlow or the Australian apple and pear industry it would sure as hell play havoc on the Australian wheat industry."

New company secretary appointed to AWB
AWB has appointed a new company secretary, lawyer Logan Armstrong.
The appointment comes after the resignations of Dr Richard Fuller and Jim Cooper as company secretaries last week.

Broadacre grain growers want more debate over herbicide
Western Australian broadacre grain growers say they will fight to keep using the herbicide 2,4-D Ester to control summer weeds.
The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority has suggested deregistering some forms of 2,4-D after claims chemical drift has affected other crops and the environment.
But farmers say they have successfully managed the herbicide for 50 years with safeguards to protect horticultural and agricultural crops.
Phil Patterson from the Gnowangerup area of the great southern grain belt says there needs to be more debate.
"Let's sit back for a minute. Ester has been around for what 50 or 60 years and I'm getting a bit sick of these experts in Canberra trying to put their ideas on the rest of the world," he said.
"I mean let them have a look at what was done in WA in the eighties and work from there.

Better prices expected for barley growers
Barley growers in South Australia can expect slightly better prices for their grain this year.
Malting barley prices will only rise by a couple of dollars but feed prices are expected to jump by up to $25 a tonne to $170.

Lack of skilled workers limiting new water projects
Attempts to fix Australia's water shortage problems are suffering because a scarcity of skilled workers.
Delegates at a National Water Conference in Alice Springs have heard that a lack of qualified experts is limiting the development of new water saving projects.
Chief executive of the Australian Water Association Chris Davis says the most severe shortages are in the science and engineering field.
"Most organisations tend to be populated by middle-aged men who are about to retire in a year or two's time so we're staring down the barrel of an even worse shortage in a couple of years from now," he said.

Salt interception project to benefit Murray River
A project to stop thousands of tonnes of salt entering the Murray River has just been opened near Kerang in north-west Victoria.
The $13 million salt interception project will pump saline groundwater from Pyramid Creek into evaporation basins.
The salt will then be commercially harvested instead of flowing into the Murray.
Goulburn Murray Water's Carl Mather says the project will benefit both farmers and the environment.
"The scheme will stop approximately 22,000 tonnes of salt reaching the River Murray," he said.

Record price set for yearling at Sydney sale
The thoroughbred industry has set a new record price for a yearling at the Easter sales in Sydney.
South African trainer Charles Laird paid $3 million for a Redoutes' Choice colt last night, beating the previous record of $2.5 million.
The record came as a surprise for the breeder.
It is the best ever yearling sale on Australian soil.
After two days of selling, buyers have spent $68 million on 240 lots, with the average price at more than $100,000 above the previous year.
Breeder of the $3 million colt Arthur Mitchell of the Yarraman Park Stud in the Hunter Valley agreed there was some luck needed but says breeding judgment helped.
"We started to get a bit of a whisper that the few Redoutes' were going quite well and we needed a stallion with a bit of size," Mr Mitchell said.

Govt's hands tied in water trading dispute
The Federal Government says it is powerless to intervene in a cross-border dispute which is holding up water reform.
Three states have been fined millions of dollars for failing to meet agreed targets on interstate water trading.
Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia will have $10 million, $13 million and $3 million in competition payments withheld respectively, opening up a new row between them and the Federal Government.
South Australia and Victoria claim they are being punished for New South Wales failing to agree on their trading model but the Iemma Government says it has met all of its water trading requirements.
National Water Commission chairman Ken Matthews will not buy into which states are responsible for the hold-up.
"I'm not taking sides among the states, all three states have been working hard," he said.
But Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull says the Federal Government has no constitutional powers to end the state stand-off.
"That is the constitutional reality," he said.
Victoria and South Australia have agreed on an exchange rate system of open-border trading but New South Wales is calling for a different model which takes into account its lower security water entitlements.
Minister for the River Murray in South Australia Karlene Maywald says she is bitterly disappointed because an agreement on water trading reform has been reached with Victoria.
"We believe that's grossly unfair and we think that South Australia is being docked $3 million when we have done everything we can to ensure that our borders are open," she said.

Govt urged to buy Snowy Hydro scheme
The Federal Government is being called on to buy Snowy Hydro and keep it as a publicly-owned water and power asset.
The call was unanimously made at an angry meeting of 350 people at Cooma, in southern New South Wales last night, who are opposed to the joint state and federal sell-off.
The scheme is expected to earn $3 billion if the sale goes ahead this year, but Snowy River Mayor Richard Wallace says public ownership is much more important.

Incentives vital to NSW timber industry: Visy exec
The timber industry says regional development will suffer if tax breaks for plantations are scrapped in next month's Budget.
The Federal Government is reviewing tax benefits for timber plantations under the Managed Investment Scheme.
But the chief executive officer of Visy Industries, Harry Debney, says retaining the incentives is vital to plans to build a second timber mill in southern New South Wales.
"We do need a long term sustainable timber industry and the investment scheme has really encouraged that softwood planting," he said.
"So I guess if the region and the country want another for example $400 million investment in Tumut that is really fundamental to it.

GrainCorp's silos closure plan angers farming groups
Anger is mounting among eastern states' farming groups about plans by GrainCorp to close more than 100 grain receival sites.
Some farmers say the decision will force them to travel up to 100 kilometres more to deliver grain.
North-west Victorian farmer Rod Bishop says he will need to purchase another truck to be able to cart grain more efficiently.
And he says others might be left with no choice but to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to set up on-farm grain storage.
"I personally don't like it that much because you have to market the grain, keep the weevils out and all those issues come into it but you certainly couldn't discount doing it, that's for sure," he said.
GrainCorp chairman Don Taylor says the company will consider keeping the silos open if growers can guarantee supply.
The grain handler has closed most sites which process less than 5,000 tonnes of grain.
Mr Taylor says GrainCorp's also willing to look at selling old infrastructure to farmers but does not think growers will be interested.

Wool industry's survival dependent on young shoppers: designer
Enticing young shoppers to wool is critical to the industry's survival, according to the head of leading men's fashion house, Ermenegildo Zegna.
The company will hold its annual awards in Melbourne tonight for wool producers from Argentina, South Africa, New Zealand and Australia.
Count Paolo Zegna says his challenge is to get his daughters interested in wearing more wool.
"What worries me the most is not what has happened until now, but what could happen in the future if the young generation of consumers don't get the message from wool," he said.

Average rainfall expected over next few months
With many farmers looking anxiously for the autumn break, the latest prediction suggests average rainfall is likely from May to July across the country.

Monica gathers strength
Tropical cyclone Monica continues to gather strength as it moves steadily west over the Gulf of Carpentaria.
The new managers of a remote cattle station in the Northern Territory are urgently stocking up on supplies.
Mainoru Station's Scott Woltman says his life in central Queensland did not prepare him for the wild weather.
"It's all new, we don't get mixed up with these sorts of things in central Queensland where we come from," he said.

Diamond production drops
The big wet season in the Kimberley in WA, has contributed to a 40 per cent drop in diamond production.

Stud owner 'optimistic' about online sale
Stud cattle are being sold exclusively on the Internet for the first time today.
Traditionally sales are conducted in person by agents with online selling offered as an additional feature.
Tanholm Limousin stud owner Kjedl Sorenson, from the Darling Downs in Queensland, says the sale has attracted interest from across Australia.
"I'm not nervous, but I'm curious to see how it goes," he said.

Fodder export company invests in Douglas-Daly region
Despite a moratorium on land clearing and uncertainty over water allocations, development in the Douglas-Daly region, 200 kilometres south of Darwin, is still going ahead.
Northern Australia Fodder Exports has bought the first of what it hopes will be a number of properties growing alfalfa for the Japanese and Korean dairy markets.
Chief executive officer Peter Ryan says there will be an initial investment of around $10 million, as a sign of faith in the region's future.
"I believe that it presents great opportunities and great natural advantages with the quality and the size of the water resource, and the climatic advantages coupled with the geographic advantages," he said.

Landcare popularity wanes
While Landcare is approaching its 20th anniversary in Victoria, a new survey shows it is not as popular as it used to be.
Over the past six years, more than 4,000 Victorians have left the movement and the number of groups has also declined.
Survey author and director of the Institute for Land, Water and Society, Professor Allan Curtis, says there are a number of reasons why people are leaving.

Tweed farmer picks up environmental award
A sugar cane farmer from northern New South Wales has been named Australia's best environmentally friendly farmer.
Robert Quirk received the 16th McKell Medal for excellence in natural resource management at a ceremony in Sydney this morning.
A farmer in the Tweed Valley for 44 years, Mr Quirk says he is dedicated to improving soils, reducing chemical use and fertiliser run-off while increasing productivity and profitability.
"It is possible to do environmental stewardship, increase your bottom line and have better outcomes all round for both the environment, the farming community and the longevity of the sugar industry, and other industries," he said.

Nullabor Muster set to boost remote town's population
The population of the isolated Western Australian town of Rawlinna is set to boom as people arrive for the annual Nullabor Muster.
The muster is not just the main event for pastoralists on the Nullabor, it is their own event for the year.
And by tonight there will be literally hundreds of swags dotted across the ground.
It is a long way from anywhere, about four hours east of Kalgoorlie-Boulder on the railway line which connects the east and west of Australia.

Farmers expected to get tax concessions
Farmers look set to win capital gains tax concessions in the federal Budget to cut the cost of passing down family farms.
There could also be a billion dollar budget bonus for rural roads with the National party believed to have secured money to link strategic roads to ports.
Currently many farmers pay huge capital gains tax bills when they sell their farm because rising rural land prices have pushed their farm value above a $5 million threshold.
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says that means producers can no longer access small business tax concessions, making farm succession planning a costly process.
Reports now suggest the Government will allow more farmers to get the tax concession.
NFF chief executive Ben Fargher says the mooted changes make sense.
"Current rules mean farmers are clicked out of being able to access those exemptions, we've asked the Government to look at it," he said.
There is also speculation the Government is considering a $1 billion roads package aimed at Queensland's Bruce and Hume Highways.
Nationals leader Mark Vaile will not confirm the spending but says he is in favour of more roads funding.

AWB 'apology document' suppression ruling looms
A bid by wheat exporter AWB to stop the release of an "apology document" is being heard in the Federal Court in Melbourne.
Earlier this month the AWB board voted to lodge the court challenge to AWB inquiry Commissioner Terence Cole's decision to lift a non-publication order on the document, which was prepared for the company last year.
The document was written by a crisis management expert, who suggested the company take a strategy of "over-apology".
Commissioner Cole ruled the document was not prepared for the purpose of legal advice and so could be published.
An AWB spokesman said the board felt the document, and others to do with AWB's internal investigation into the scandal, should be protected by legal professional privilege.
Former managing director Andrew Lindberg has told the court he engaged a US public relations consultant to put together the statement of contrition ,which would be presented to the Cole inquiry.
Under cross-examination he denied the statement was prepared for PR purposes but maintained it was part of the company's legal strategy.
However Mr Lindberg acknowledged any statement to the inquiry would attract widespread publicity.
The court is expected to make a decision today on whether to release the document.

Acting CEO resigns
Meanwhile AWB is looking for someone to fill its top job following the resignation of acting chief executive Peter Polson.
Mr Polson replaced Mr Lindberg but in a statement to the Australian Stock Exchange, AWB says he wants to concentrate on other business interests.
Mr Polson will continue to be an AWB director.
Executive chairman Brendan Stewart will step into the vacancy until a new CEO is found.

Credibility damaged
In another development, a survey shows the credibility of the Federal Government and wheat exporter AWB has been damaged by the oil-for-food scandal.
Roy Morgan Research has surveyed more than 650 people living in rural and metropolitan areas about their perceptions of AWB and the Government since the Cole inquiry began.
Director Gary Morgan says the public is not accepting the message being pushed by the Government about its knowledge of the deals and most have questions about AWB.
"Sixty-five per cent said they did not act ethically, only 12 per cent said they did," Mr Morgan said.
"We asked the question: 'Do you think the Prime Minister John Howard acted ethically on this issue or not'.
"Fifty-four per cent said no, he did not act ethically, 29 per cent said he did, 17 per cent were undecided.
"We asked the same question about Alexander Downer. Fifty-six per cent said 'he did not act ethically'.

Darwin residents prepare for Monica's onslaught
Preparations for tropical cyclone Monica are under way across the city of Darwin in the Northern Territory.
The category 5 system has already created major disruptions with commercial fishing.
As tropical cyclone Monica tracks west across the Gulf of Carpentaria, many of the 75 prawn trawlers that fish the remote off-shore regions took shelter in calmer waters to the south near Karumba and the Northern Territory-Queensland border.
Others steamed back to their northern ports such as the Francis Bay Mooring Basin in Darwin.
The interruption to the banana prawn harvest has created at least one week of disrupted fishing time and wasted fuel in not ideal fishing grounds.
One of the largest companies, NewFishing Australia, estimates the disruption will cost them tens of thousands of dollars.
It is an unusual sight to see trawlers and fishing vessels in the Darwin Port in the middle of the season which ends in just under one month.
They are being double lashed to moorings with ropes and packed in tight side by side with tyre fenders between them to reduce friction.
And the level of water in this mooring basin will be dropped to allow these large vessels to rest on the bottom for the worst of the weather. 

Flooding
And rain from cyclone Monica is causing the worst floods in living memory in parts of far north Queensland.
Residents from a Cape York Peninsula aboriginal community and at least three families from cattle properties have been airlifted to drier ground.
Glen Shephard from Lilyvale Station, near Princess Charlotte Bay, says he has never seen anything like it
"Wednesday afternoon it started to rain and by about seven o'clock the next morning we'd had seven inches so the water was starting to tickle our toes, sort a thing," he said.
"It came through the house about fourteen or fifteen inches ... had to walk across the airstrip to get over on a bit of high ground.
"It's always a concern about crocs in this country [but] ... I didn't tell the kids that."
Senior forecaster at the Bureau of Meteorology David Alexander says Monica is one of the most perfect cyclone systems he has seen.
He says it is far more dangerous than cyclone Larry which caused massive destruction in far north Queensland last month.
"It's probably the best developed cyclone I have seen in many, many years," he said.
"It's got a perfect circular eye, it's right at the top of a category 5 range, so it's a very, very severe cyclone.

Egg producers unhappy at adjustment package rejection
Egg producers are furious that a meeting of state and federal primary industries ministers has refused to endorse a $23 million adjustment package.
The funds would have helped farmers to leave the sector if they could not afford to upgrade to bigger hen cages under new animal welfare laws.
President Jeff Ironside says the changes are being imposed by government and compensation should be paid.
"Unfortunately you can't do anything with the old systems because they don't lend themselves to tampering with the size," he said.
"So egg producers virtually have to go out and buy new equipment to comply with the new regulations because it is around about 50 bucks a bird, you know a farm with 20,000 birds, a million dollars."

McGuigan Simeon rejects analyst's prices
Wine giant McGuigan Simeon has told growers in the Riverland and Sunraysia it will not accept prices set by an independent analyst last week.
The analyst was called into settle a dispute over how much the winery was prepared to pay growers for grapes already delivered.
Chris Byrne from the Riverland Wine Grape Growers Association says the company must now explain why it will not accept the prices.

High bacteria levels stop oyster production
Oyster production in the Bellinger River on New South Wales mid-north coast has been halted due to unacceptably high levels of E. coli.
The New South Wales Food Authority has stopped harvesting Sydney Rock Oysters indefinitely.
John Lindsay from the Bellinger Oyster Growers Association says growers are shocked and more should have been done earlier by authorities.
"We're all extremely surprised because we always thought the Bellinger River was one of the pristine rivers," he said.
"We always thought it was one of the best rivers on the north coast. Obviously not. We knew there were some problems in there.
"We've been onto council, we've been onto the Food Authority to try and clear up some hot spots.

Farmers hit out at dept land clearing inspection methods
Farmers in western New South Wales have vowed to prevent state Department of Natural Resources officials from entering their properties to conduct land clearing inspections.
The farmers are angry at recent compliance checks where the department used a police escort.
Doug Menzies says 200 farmers who attended a meeting in Nyngan are fed up with what they say is unworkable legislation and heavy handed government approach.
"We've tried every legal avenue we can and we just get stonewalled every time," he said.

Irrigators confident of accessing water from gas reserves
Southern Queensland irrigators are confident they will be next in line to access vast amounts of water from underground coal seam gas reserves.
The Federal Government has announced a $10 million project to allow the Dalby Town Council to use 1,000 megalitres of water extracted along with natural gas by Arrow Energy.
Cotton grower Paul McVeigh says irrigators are making an application to the National Water Commission so they access the water.
"The challenges I suppose this is new water, it's water that's never been available before and I think the exciting side of it is that at this stage you know water is probably the biggest issue in the whole Australian community and here we are sitting on a great asset," he said.

Potato harvesters dig up WWII mortar bomb
A team of potato harvesters in northern Tasmania dug up more than they bargained for at the weekend - a World War II mortar bomb.
Army bomb disposal experts were flown from Melbourne to the Campbell Town farm and declared the rusty three kilogram bomb to be a harmless practice round.
Major Danny Rowe says they are called out to Tasmania on average once a month and only 10 per cent of bombs are found to be live.
"Some of the areas around here were used during the war and post war as practice ranges, for troops that were billeted down in Tasmania, so some of these areas have old ammunition on them that have been fired during the war," he said.

McGauran denies breaking promise over fruit code of conduct
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran has been accused of breaking an election promise, by not including the big supermarkets in a mandatory code of conduct for the fruit and vegetable sector.
Despite concerns within his own party, Mr McGauran is expected to take the code to Cabinet tomorrow.
National Party backbenchers say the Government is not delivering on what it promised.
In a statement during the election former leader John Anderson said the code would give producers a fairer deal on terms of trade and in resolving disputes with produce buyers, who are in many instances large supermarket chains.
Member for Mallee John Forrest says the Government may as well not have the code at all if it does not include the big retailers.
"To leave them out isn't delivering what we said we would deliver," he said.
The Government also faces a legal challenge from wholesale markets who are included in the code.
Central Markets Association spokesman Andrew Young says the current plan gives supermarkets an unfair advantage over market wholesalers.
"It should be workable and right now we're facing something which in many respects doesn't meet any of those criteria," he said.
But Mr McGauran denies he is breaking an election promise and says the code was never meant to include retailers like Coles and Woolworths.
He says the real problems for growers occur when they send produce to market wholesalers.
"Retailers were never part of the election commitment which was written down," he said.

Citrus company blocks canker surveillance officials
One of Australia's major citrus growing companies has closed its gates to Queensland's citrus canker surveillance authorities.
The discovery of canker at Emerald in 2004 decimated the local industry, with the destruction of tens of thousands of fruit trees.
2PH Farms says the blockade is to support local orchardist Maurie Iddles, who missed out on financial assistance in the wake of the outbreak.
Craig Pressler of 2PH says it was not an easy choice, with both farmers risking their plans to replant orchards next year.
"Well the decision wasn't taken lightly," he said.
"We wish to support Maurie and Connie in their fight for fair and equitable treatment with regards to compensation.

NZ apple growers hit back at wheat bug claims
Kiwi apple growers are angry at claims a native New Zealand wheat bug was spread to Europe by apple packaging.
Australian growers say the discovery of wheat bug in Belgium and Holland could raise new concerns about the risks posed by New Zealand apple imports.
But Peter Beaven from Pipfruit New Zealand says a study has shown the pest has a limited ability to survive cool storage.
"We don't believe for a moment it got there on apples it must have got there on some other commodity that's not cool stored or on the clothing of tourists," he said.

Decision reserved on AWB 'apology' document
A Federal Court Judge has reserved his decision on whether to make AWB's so-called apology document public.
In hearings yesterday AWB argued the apology was drafted as part of the company's legal preparations for the Cole Inquiry.
Appearing as a witness for AWB, former managing director Andrew Lindberg told the court fellow board member Peter Polson had recommended a US public relations consultant to help draft the apology, given his experience with crisis management.
Mr Polson resigned as acting chief executive of the company last Friday.
But counsel for the Commonwealth said the main purpose for the draft apology was to influence public opinion and help AWB's public relations strategy, by submitting the document to the Inquiry.
Justice Young has reserved his decision for a date to be set.

S Africa begins Iraq kickback inquiry
South Africa has established its own version of the Cole inquiry, into allegations of kickbacks to the former Iraqi regime of Saddam Hussein.
Eight South African companies have been subpoenaed to appear at the Donen Commission.
Public hearings will begin in two weeks and will investigate illegal oil surcharges, after-sales-service-fees and inland transportation fees paid to Iraqi officials.
Secretary of the commission, Matsepo Mobeng says the South African government has looked to Australia's example.

Cyclone Monica downgraded
Darwin residents are breathing a bit easier today, with tropical Cyclone Monica downgraded to a category 1 system this morning.
Remote pearl farms too appear to have been spared major damage from the cyclone, which had been rated a destructive category five yesterday.
Chris Barnard from Arafura Pearls, north of Nhulunbuy says it is a lucky escape.
"As the winds intensified, we would have got up to about 180-200km/hr winds," he said.
"We were lucky this cyclone season in the NT. Unfortunately what I have heard from WA is that they have had a bit of a rough time. But in the NT we were saved this season. It was just a reminder to be on your toes the whole time. You never know when one might hit, even as late as it is in this season."

Stormy weather causes diamond price drop
The stormy weather across northern Australia is affecting the price of diamonds.
Production at the world's biggest diamond mine, Argyle Diamonds in WA, dropped significantly in the first quarter due to wet weather.
Diamond expert James McGlew says the production drop, along with a rush of diamond buying worldwide, is going to make a sparkler much more expensive.
"I mean over the last three years we've seen average price rises totalling about 60 per cent in price," he said.

Cazaly court action chances 'relatively slim'
A resources analyst says a Federal Court bid over the rights to an iron ore tenement in Western Australia's north-west has little chance of success.
Cazaly Resources pegged the large deposit in September when it become clear mining giant Rio Tinto had forgotten to renew its lease.
Mines Minister John Bowler has ruled the land be returned to Rio, resulting in a $75 million loss for Cazaly shareholders on the stock exchange yesterday.
But Hartley's Rob Brierley says Cazaly's court action could be in vain.

McGuigan denies grower grape prices claims
Wine giant McGuigan Simeon has denied grower claims it will not pay new grape prices set by an independent analyst.
Grower associations in the Riverland and Murray Valley claim the winery has written to growers saying it will not accept the new prices.
But chief executive Dane Hudson says there has been a misunderstanding.

New techniques found to reduce fishing deaths
A four year project has shown commercial anglers can use long lines for deep sea fishing without killing thousands of seabirds.
In the past trailing baited hooks behind trawlers in Antarctic waters has caused the deaths of up to 3,000 birds a year.
Techniques, including quickly sinking hooks and hauling them in differently, have reduced sea bird deaths to zero.
Les Scott from fishing company Petuna Sealord says other countries should follow Australia's lead.
"The statistics show that the mitigation methods work because if you look at our neighbours their bird mortality is still 2,000 plus," he said.

East Timor joins in Anzac services
A special Anzac Day dawn service has been held in Dili, the capital of East Timor.
It has commemorated 11 Australian soldiers believed to have died there in 1942.
During World War II, Australia's Sparrow Force worked deep in the rugged mountain jungles of East Timor.
Helio Tavares says they conducted guerrilla operations against the Japanese and were supported by the Timorese people.
"During World War II the Timorese, supported the Australians, because they didn't want East Timor to be invaded by the Japanese Army," he said.
"Throughout the four years of struggle, up to 44,000 Timorese died assisting Australian soldiers.
"The Timorese really value that relationship with Australia and we can see it today.
"The Prime Minister addressing the people and saying that Australia is a very important neighbour and a partner in the development of the country."
The school of the air in outback Queensland is also getting into the Anzac spirit.
A group of students from cattle stations in the Richmond area west of Townsville has spent weeks practising the national anthem to perform for the local Anzac parade.

Teleworking project aimed at helping rural women
A new project is trying to get more rural women in jobs without having to leave home.
Teleworking would allow women to utilise their education and professional experience without the need to travel long distances.
Chris Capel from the Foundation for Australian Agricultural Women says getting companies to take on teleworkers is the biggest challenge.
"It'll be convincing employers and business [that] will be the major hurdle I think," she said.

Mulesing replacement trial axed
The race to find an alternative to sheep mulesing by 2010 has hit a major hurdle, with the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) banning a key product being used in trials.
Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) has been injecting collagenase into sheep's backsides to inhibit the growth of wool.
But the trials have now been dumped, with AQIS warning the biological agent poses a biosecurity risk and could carry mad cow disease.
AWI's Scott Williams says while it is costly to lose the research, other trials are in progress.
"It's always costly to try and do R&D at the sort of pace we're doing it at because we've only got a very short deadline, of course," he said.
"That means you sometimes duplicate things because you can't afford to fail, so we've had, you know, three or four different fronts moving forward at once, even though we may only need one or two of those.

Court opposes chicken meat producers' bid for joint action
Farmers have lost a five year legal battle for the right to band together to refuse to supply processors.
The court action was launched by Victoria's chicken meat producers, who wanted to set a precedent for other farmers with limited contract options, including the potato, wine grape and dairy sectors.
Under the Trade Practices Act, individuals can refuse to supply produce, but not groups.
President of the Victoria Farmers' Federation's chicken meat group, John Clarke, says the Federal Court's decision is a blow.
"The processors are dealing opportunistically with growers and abusing their market power but they haven't seen fit, or the tribunal hasn't seen fit, to go the extra step and give us [the] right to have countervailing power.

Grain growers' future not looking rosy
Changing weather patterns, weed resistance and higher input costs are putting pressure on grain farm incomes, despite more land being cropped than ever before.
In the short term, farm incomes will go up but figures from ABARE and the Grains Research and Development Corporation, say the picture is not as rosy further out.
Increased production in Australia and strong global competition will keep grain prices low.
Agricultural analyst Neil Clark says average-sized farmers have tough times ahead.
"The price of grain has been falling at about an average of 2.2 per cent for the last 28 years and yet we all know that the costs of fertiliser, fuel and in particular debt servicing are going to be at an all time high for the coming cropping season and the commodity prices aren't all that great yet," he said.
"It's always great for the top 25 per cent and if we look at any of the ABARE studies they do shine.

Lack of rain doesn't prevent crop sowing
Crop sowing is under way in some parts of the country, despite the lack of a significant autumn break in Australia's south-east.
Plenty of unseasonal summer rain has led Western Australian growers to plant canola and lupins earlier than usual, to make the most of sub soil moisture.
Tenindewa farmer Glen Thomas is planting 6,690 hectares but says he is holding back on certain crops, like lupins, because of poor prices.
"We probably would have put even more in, given the summer rain. But we're just going to cap it at [1,000] where that's a big enough risk as it is," he said.

April rainfall sets Darwin record
The passage of tropical cyclone Monica in the Northern Territory has resulted in new rainfall levels.
Darwin has had its wettest April since falls records began 65 years ago.
A total of 383 millimetres has fallen so far this month and weather bureau forecaster Patrick Ward says that is close to four times the average.
"Darwin had about 53 mm at the airport, down towards Adelaide River it was a lot heavier. East branch Adelaide River had 224 mm, which is quite a lot," he said.
"This time of year it's sort of the clearing up period of the monsoon season and into the dry. It's unseasonably late to get a cyclone. It's just about the latest cyclone we have had."

'Smart card' introduction raises regional concerns
Concerns have been raised about potential logistical, cost and privacy problems in regional Australia with the introduction of a national identification card.
Federal Cabinet is today considering the so-called "smart card" which all Australian adults would need to access Medicare, welfare and tax benefits.
But independent federal MP for New England Tony Windsor says he has seen no evidence that the benefits would justify the expense.
"Well very, very costly of course for people who have got distance and remoteness to contend with," he said.
"What if there are technical problems, if that personal information is on a card and it is lost.
"We can see what computer fraud can do in accessing people's information.

Regional family day care operators fear for future
Family day care operators in many regional areas are worried they could be forced to reduce services or even close within months because of funding shortfalls.
The threat comes on top of a drop in available childcare places over the past year due to changes to funding.
Tracey Guerin from the Alice Springs Family Day Care Centre says the situation will get worse unless the federal Budget includes more financial support.
"I have grave concerns for the future of the service. I don't believe that we'll be funded to the same level as we have been and I think that we will either have to look at offering less of a service or closing all together," she said.

Investment schemes urged to stop new vineyard developments
Wine grape growers are urging investment schemes to put the brakes on new vineyard developments.
Peak body Wine Grape Growers Australia says money is still being put into the sector despite a massive oversupply of grapes.
Executive director Mark McKenzie says people should be wary about investing without a long term, secure contract for the fruit.
"It's not just independent grape growers or contracted, or uncontracted, grape growers who supply to wineries would be concerned," he said.

Newcastle shipment may provide new export opportunities
A live export shipment has left the port of Newcastle in New South Wales for the first time in years.
The ship, carrying 980 dairy cows, will arrive in Japan in a fortnight.
Cameron Hall from LiveCorp says it could be a new opportunity for the dairy sector in a state not known for live animal exports.

Aust to help improve Vietnamese industries
An Australian man has been appointed to help improve Vietnam's dairy and beef industries.
Vietnam's 25,000 dairy farmers have only four cows each on average.
Over the next five years, John Hopkins from Swan Hill will select 9,000 Australian cows for export to help boost herd numbers.
He will also help to establish a dairy training facility at the National Institute of Animal Husbandry in Saigon.
"They are really struggling with it and they are getting so many things wrong," he said.

Satellite tracking collars to track dingoes
Dingoes in southern and western Queensland are being fitted with satellite tracking collars.
The collars are part of a two year research project to help track and contain wild dog numbers.
Leigh Allen from the Department of Natural Resources and Mines says they have targeted three state forests near Roma, Dalby and Morven where baiting is not working.
"This is a research project to understand more about where dogs are coming from, how far they're moving and what the sources of the current problem are," she said.

Humans urged to adopt animal eating patterns
A study into the eating patterns of animals could help cut obesity rates in Western countries.
Left to choose their own food, research has shown animals will first seek out protein and never become obese.
In a natural state, the same is true for humans.
But Professor Steve Simpson from the University of Sydney says modern diets with high fat and salt contents trick people into overeating.
"But if you simply change the ratio and you can do that in one or two ways - incorporating high quality protein items in the diet and by that I mean lean meat or fish or high quality vegetable proteins," he said.

Upper Hunter stallion breaks stud fee record
A new Australian record for a stud fee has been set by the stallion Redoute's Choice.
The Arrowfield stud in the Upper Hunter of New South Wales has increased the champion stallion's service fee from $220,000 to $275,000.

Study spell trouble for single desk: Opposition
The Federal Opposition says the Government is carrying out a 'hatchet job' on the wheat export system by funding a study which it believes will call for the removal of the single desk.
Opposition agriculture spokesman Gavan O'Connor says grains industry think tank, Single Vision Australia, has commissioned a report into the single desk.
Single Vision is funded by the Government through the Grains Research and Development Corporation and has asked the Centre for International Economics to carry out research into the wheat export system.
And Mr O'Connor says that spells trouble for the single desk.
"It's the sort of organisation I think you employ when you want a hatchet job on the issue," he said.
The Government denies it had anything to do with setting up the report.
And Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says while the Government will consider its findings, it will not necessarily become policy.
"It will be an interesting read and whether or not it ever becomes public policy I wouldn't know," he said.
The report is due for release in the next few weeks.
Meanwhile hundreds of grain growers from across Western Australia have gathered in the wheatbelt town on Cunderdin to show support for the single desk.
Deputy Prime Minister Mark Vaile is also there to listen to farmers' concerns.
Brookton farmer Wanda Mattingly says WA growers want to send a clear message to Prime Minister John Howard that he needs to protect the current system.
"If we don't do something and then we sit back and whinge about it then we are our own worst enemies," he said.

Panel urges national approach to GM technology regulation
There is a call today for a national approach to the regulation of gene technology because of confusion caused by state-based bans on genetically modified (GM) crops.
The Gene Technology Act was introduced in 2000 to oversee the use of GM technology in Australia but since then all states except Queensland and the Northern Territory have imposed their own rules.
Chairwoman of an independent panel which has reviewed the Act, Susan Timbs, says the regulations have become too confusing.
"This was a point that was made very strongly to us by industry, that if they go through and get their approval from the regulator, suddenly they feel that there is a complete block because they don't know the criteria that they need to meet to convince the relevant state governments," she said.

Remote station may be nominated as alternative dump site
There is speculation in the Northern Territory that a remote cattle station could be nominated as an alternative site for a national nuclear waste dump.
Senator Nigel Scullion has intimated that Northern Land Council lands near Tennant Creek are being considered.
One of the few Aboriginal stations in the region is Muckaty on the edge of the Barkly Tableland.
Former station owner Miriam Hagan says while the area is drier than the proposed Top End site, she would still have grave concerns for the cattle country, if the rumour is true.
"I'm quite stunned actually and I do think it would be a profanity to put that on the beloved place where my sisters and I grew up," she said.
"There are, you know, deep underground aquifers, so I think a lot of homework would have to be done.

Hydro sale inquiry calls grow
Pressure is mounting on the New South Wales Government to hold a public inquiry into plans to privatise Snowy Hydro.
A big meeting of irrigators in southern New South Wales has called for legislation to guarantee their access to water.
The meeting of 200 irrigators in Griffith last night follows a fiery gatherting of 300 people in Cooma last week.
Irrigators are seeking a guarantee that minimum releases to the Murray and Murrumbidgee Rivers, covered by the Snowy water agreement, will be legislated.
They are also calling for a 10 per cent cap on individual shareholdings.
A former Snowy Hydro commissioner, Vin Good, urged people to oppose the sale.
"This Australian heritage icon should be kept in Government ownership forever," he said.
With harvest drawing to a close, up to 3 per cent of wine grapes will be left unpicked this year, due to oversupply.
The national vintage is expected to reach 1.9 million tonnes, just 1 per cent down on last season.

Row brews over european bumblebees plan
A row has erupted over a plan to import european bumblebees to mainland Australia.
While the horticulture sector says they could help boost production in greenhouse and hydroponic operations, environmentalists are worried about other impacts.
A Department of Environment and Heritage report released for public comment last week is considering the importation of bumblebees for controlled crop pollination.
Queensland greenhouse tomato grower David Da Pra says it would dramatically boost production.
"Bring higher pollination, which will give better fruit quality, better shelf life, more saleable fruit," he said.
The Wide Bay Conservation Council's Pam Soper wants further research into artificial pollination, strongly opposing the importation of the bumblebee.

Resource boom behind zinc mine's reopening
The booming base metals price has led to the reopening of an old zinc mine in the Kimberley region of Western Australia.
Canadian company Teck Cominco will reopen its underground mine near Fitzroy Crossing because of a recent hike in zinc prices on the London Metal Exchange.
Teck Cominco exploration general manager Wayne Spilsbury says zinc is performing well after a three-year price glut.
"We were watching the stocks of zinc in the LME warehouses and making sure those numbers were coming down before we made a decision to reopen. There is now an under supply, but that has only turned up in the last year or so."
In South Australia, junior zinc explorer Terramin Australia has also benefited.

Pastoralists brush up on first aid
Some of the Northern Territory's most isolated pastoralists are in Tennant Creek to improve their medical skills today, amid concerns over the future of health services.
Station managers and workers from around the Northern Territory's Barkly Tablelands have travelled hundreds of kilometres to the central Australian town of Tennant Creek for the annual Barkly Health Seminar.
Heavy rain and boggy roads has done nothing to keep people away at a time of uncertainty about the future of remote health services in the region.
Pastoralists have expressed concern that visits by health experts to pastoral stations may soon be cut back.

Former station to provide haven for protected species
A former 63,000 hectare pastoral station in South Australia's north-east has been opened as a conservation park.
Boolcoomatta Station has been bought by the Federal Government and the Nature Foundation of South Australia to protect endangered bird life and flora.
Doug Humann from the Australian Bush Heritage Fund, which will manage the property, says it is a unique bioregion.
"It's a property that embraces vegetation systems and land types that are very poorly reserved in Australia," he said.
"It contains vulnerable species like the plains wanderer, a bird and we hope in future yellow footed rock wallabies.

Fruit fly find concerns growers
Fruit and vegetable producers on the Adelaide Plains are worried about the impact of a fruit fly outbreak.
Mediterranean fruit fly, which also targets vegetables, has been detected in Adelaide's north-west suburbs.
Mike Redmond, from the Virginia Horticulture Centre, north of the outbreak, says a quarantine area has been established and sterile flies are being released to contain the spread.
"If it got into our greenhouses it would be horrific for our industry," Mr Redmond said.
"Tomatoes, capsicums, eggplants would be the main impacts from our perspective.

Eucalyptus rust fears
The Primary Industries Ministerial Council meeting last week sounded an alarm call on the fungal disease, eucalyptus rust. The council noted the tree disease, native to South and Central America, had reached Hawaii, and there are fears it could get into Australia. Indeed the council went so far as to suggest that prevention and contingency plans for the disease be prepared as a matter of urgency. The disease attacks plants under two years of age, causing leaf and shoot dieback and killing the plant. Potentially it could kill not only large numbers of young plantation trees but also native eucalypts, as it has a wide number of eucalypts which could act as hosts. Ensis have predicted the areas most likely to be at risk are the NT, coastal Queensland and NSW. However, generally warmer conditions could see it easily colonise regions further south. In Brazil, there is a 40 per cent fatality from the disease.

Footrot control review
The continuation of the state's sheep footrot control program has been assured after a comprehensive review by representatives from the South Australian Sheep Advisory Committee, the South Australian Farmers Federation and PIRSA. In the 1950s, about one third of the sheep flocks in the south-east were suffering from the disease but eradication programs and improved diagnosis have eradicated the most virulent strains. Sheep with the disease find it difficult to walk and can get fly blown feet and legs from the disease, and they must be quarantined. Footrot is still a notifiable disease although new technologies would be trialed to find better control methods.

More work to be done on fresh produce code of conduct
The Federal Government denies it has broken a key election promise for a mandatory code of conduct for the fresh produce sector, despite further delays.
The code, to improve relations between wholesalers and growers, was to have been introduced within 100 days of the last election.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran now admits there is still more work to be done after Cabinet again failed to agree on the plan this week.
He also says statements by former deputy prime minister John Anderson that the code would include the big supermarket chains have been misinterpreted.
"I thought that was quite ambiguous and was a broadening out of his other statements that I've had regard to," he said.
"So it might have been in Mr Anderson's mind to expand it to supermarkets but that would have been policy on the run."
The National Farmers Federation says the Government's 100 day deadline was always unachievable.
Despite wanting the retail sector included originally, vice-president Charles Burke now just wants the policy in place as soon as possible.

Veg prices increase not flowing through to farmers
New figures show vegetables are costing 15 per cent more than at this time last year.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics says the cost of food overall jumped more than 4 per cent last quarter due to a hot summer and higher costs for inputs like fuel and packaging.
Mike Badcock from vegetable grower group AUSVEG says despite the rises, farmers are not seeing any increase in their profits.
"The very hot summer that eastern Australia experienced this year really affected production, it basically cooked the product in the ground and it wasn't suitable so there's been some quite large shortages of product - that's the reason prices have gone up," he said.
"The two major supermarket chains control about 76 per cent of the market, they've never had so much market share and they're becoming quite aggressive on what prices they pay for product.

Security tight for World Meat Congress
Animal rights campaigners have attempted to disrupt the World Meat Congress in Brisbane, where 600 delegates are discussing the future of the industry.
Protesters crying "murder" also say the Federal Government is sanctioning animal cruelty.
Security is tight at the World Meat Congress with police surrounding the Convention Centre in Brisbane and security guards everywhere inside the building.
The protest comes as Australia is experiencing unprecedented growth in the cattle and beef industry.
Cattle numbers are expected to grow by nearly 3 million head in the next four years and the value of exports has risen by $870 million since 2003, that's on the back of growth in Japan and Korea.
But keynote speaker at the Congress, Professor David Hughes, says while industry cannot ignore concerns about animal welfare, the total opposition to the farming of livestock represents a minority worldwide.

Murray River irrigators to sell water to Govt
The Federal Government will buy back water from Murray River irrigators to meet its targets for environmental flows.
Irrigators will be able to apply to sell water they have saved through improved on-farm infrastructure.
It is designed to help supply 500 gigalitres of water under the Living Murray Initiative.
Parliamentary Secretary for water policy Malcolm Turnbull says the tender process will be put forward at the next ministerial council meeting.

Oil-for-food inquiry adjourned
Apart from one last witness, public hearings at the oil-for-food inquiry are over.
Commissioner Terence Cole has formally adjourned the four month investigation.
Former UN customs official, Felicity Johnstone, will fly to Australia in mid-May to give evidence.

High Aussie dollar hurts farm profits
Economists say the rising Aussie dollar is cutting into farm returns.
The dollar has risen five cents over the past few days and overnight lifted above 75 US cents.
Westpac senior economist Justin Smirk says speculation over an interest rate rise next month has fuelled the increases.
But he says other factors are also having an impact.
"Commodity prices globally really haven't gone anywhere over the last 12 months or if anything perhaps have eased a bit," he said.
"So this strong Aussie dollar, of course, is crimping back our exporters income for the farmers and really when you are thinking about the farm sector - higher interest rates yes they will bite a bit around the margin.
"But perhaps the real significance is what we can't control and that is the rainfall out there and that is really going to be the driving factor of whether farmers have a good year or not."
The higher dollar and a large volume of wool has not helped the wool market, with sales resuming after the Easter recess.

Wool bale sold to fashion house for $63,000
The finest bale of wool ever offered in Australia has been sold for around $63,000.
The bale of 11.7 micron wool was sold by Ian and Kaye Appledore from Victoria's Wimmera region for 70,000 cents a kilogram to Italian fashion house, Lora Piana.
Ian Appledore is happy with the price, but says the bale was not the best they had to offer yesterday.
"11.7 [micron] wasn't our topline bale, our topline bale eventually sold as well once again to Lora Piana," he said.
"We sold that one for 48. The reason the 11.7 was our second line bale was it just didn't have the strength of the first one.

Tennant Creek residents oppose toxic dump
Residents of Tennant Creek in the Territory have rejected suggestions that a national toxic waste dump be built near the town.
Muckaty station just north of Tennant Creek has been identified as a possible site.
Three sites near Alice Springs and Katherine have been short-listed for the dump, but there is growing speculation that none of them will be chosen.

Vic Govt to challenge wind farm ban
The Victorian Government will take Federal Court action in a bid to overturn a decision to stop a wind farm development in south Gippsland.
Federal Environment Minister Ian Campbell blocked the $220 million project because of a threat to the endangered orange bellied parrot.
While the State Government says the decision was unreasonable local farmer Don Jelbart believes it was the right one.
"They keep coming back to the parrot but there's 17 threatened species there," he said.

Adelaide River battles flooding
The Northern Territory community of Adelaide River is battling flooding in the wake of tropical cyclone Monica.
More than 150 millimetres of rain fell on Anzac Day alone this week.
Kai Hansen lives on Goat Island on the western edge of Kakadu National Park and says brown, crocodile-infested waters are roaring past his house.
"There is no dry land left at all. We knew this beforehand that there is a potential for it to come up here but 800mm of rain in one month, and 290mm of rain in 19 hours we had - it's an incredible amount of water," he said.
"I don't think we will see any crocs because as soon as water gets a bit rough the crocs seek quieter land.
"We don't worry about it, we walk around chest deep in the water now and then outside to salvage more things and get the boats and barges tied up and get to the generator shed, and we don't even consider it."

Councils seek to fill jobs through Melbourne advertising
A group of western Victorian councils have resorted to advertising in Melbourne newspapers to try to lure workers.
Ararat Rural City and the shires of Northern Grampians and Pyrenees will use ratepayer and state funds for the campaign, to address the skills shortage.
Ararat Council's rural development manager Mark Hogan says tradespeople, medical professionals and agricultural workers are all in short supply.
"The key area that made our mind up that this was the way we needed to go was some recent research from state and federal governments which showed that the number of people applying for jobs in our region and the Wimmera area is very small," he said.
