The Federal Government says it will not be pressured into changing the single desk wheat export system before the outcome of the oil-for-food inquiry.
Some Coalition MPs are calling for AWB's veto power to be removed but Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says that will not happen yet.
"AWB and other bulk handlers and other interested parties all know that," he said.

Transport sector calls for better infrastructure
The trucking industry says new laws to reduce driver fatigue must be accompanied by major government spending on roads.
The National Transport Commission has released the final version of its plans to reduce driving hours and increase penalties in a bid to improve safety.
While many concerns with the commission's initial recommendations have been addressed, the transport sector says better infrastructure is needed.
Stuart St Clair from the Australian Trucking Association says drivers can not meet new rest break requirements unless 21,000 new rest areas are built.
"It's very difficult to put an onus on the trucking industry and its drivers to perform to the necessary regulations, that's one thing and we accept that responsibility," he said.

Democrats' victory makes trade deals harder: consultant
With the Democrats sweeping back into power in the US Congress, the Bush administration faces a major challenge to its power to broker trade deals next year.
The Congress, even in Republican hands, has passed recent trade deals by the narrowest of margins.
Now, with Democrats in charge, Democratic trade consultant and former US Agriculture Department trade adviser Paul Drazek sees little hope for renewing the President's power to make trade deals, expiring next July.
"I think the changes of his getting that approval are pretty remote now. I mean, why would the Democrats in the House want to give the President a victory on a trade issue ... effectively, 18 months before the next election," Mr Drazek said.

Grain harvesters hit out at farmers' pay rates
Grain harvesters say some farmers are taking advantage of the drought conditions to reduce their pay.
The Australian Grain Harvesters Association says some large corporate farms in Queensland have dropped their pay rates from $14 dollars an acre to $10 dollars.
President Peter Bradley says despite contractors being desperate for work, there is no justification for paying less because of poor quality crops.
"The quality of the grain, whether it be good, bad or indifferent this year, is that there's so little grain around that the price of the grain has risen to double what they were getting last year and sometimes triple nearly," he said.

Federation won't bend seed rules
The Australian Seeds Federation says it is not willing to bend the rules to allow farmers to donate seed to other growers this year.
The South Australian Farmers Federation says plant breeders rights that prevent certain seed varieties being traded or given away should be relaxed during the drought.
But the seed federation's Christopher Melham says any changes would stop seed companies investing in new varieties.

Fruit growers halve watering times
Victoria's fruit growers are cutting their watering times by half to ensure water supplies will last the season.
Extreme water shortages, particularly in the Goulburn Valley, mean orchardists have had to find ways to stretch their irrigation water.
Senior horticultural adviser Henry Schneider says new watering techniques for stonefruit are proving successful.
"Peaches respond very well to regulated deficit irrigation (RDI) it's a matter of just irrigating those peaches as you would on the normal intervals, say once a week but cut the irrigation time in half," he said.

Apricot orchard records bumper harvest
An apricot orchard in far western New South Wales has bounced back from having its lowest recorded yield last year to a bumper harvest this season.
The Tandou company says it can not plant cotton near Menindee this year because water allocations are too low.
But spokesman Vince Trotter says the big results in Tandou's orchard will influence the company's future.

Glider collecting soil, climate change information
A glider is flying over southern New South Wales this week is collecting information for an international project to understand soil moisture and climate change.
The European Space Agency is launching a satellite next year to measure soil moisture from space and Australian researchers are developing models to interpret the data.
The data collected by the glider will make the models more accurate.
The University of Melbourne's Dr Jeff Walker says the aim is to provide farmers and government with better information.

Wool grower wants mulesing trial money redirected
Wool growers are being urged to start breeding so-called bare-bum sheep now to stave off future controversy over surgical mulesing.
The industry has vowed to phase out mulesing by 2010 to placate animal welfare groups.
Dubbo grazier Don Mudford is already breeding sheep that do not need mulesing and believes the industry should be spending more money on marketing, instead of searching for mulesing alternatives.
"Because the day will come whether it's in three years or not, the day will come when they won't be able to mules but to stop mulesing the whole flock will take a few years," he said.

Govt urged to dump GST on school boarders' food
There is a call today for the Federal Government to dump the GST on food for boarding school students to bring down costs for struggling country families.
Gary Le Duff from the Association of Independent Schools in South Australia says rural families which send their children to boarding schools should be entitled to financial assistance.
He says the current application of GST for schools is different to other institutions.
"There is an anomaly where boarding food is actually charged GST but if you're in a hostel or staying a hospital there's no GST," he said.

Drought takes toll on small native mammals
The dry in central Australia has taken its toll on small native mammals in the West MacDonnell Ranges near Alice Springs.
An annual survey has found no central rock rats and no desert or native mice.
Glen Edwards from Parks and Wildlife says while the results are the worst in more than a decade, he is hopeful the species will re-populate.

Top South Korean chefs tour Australia
Imagination and talent have paid off for five of South Korea's top young chefs, who are touring Australia after winning a major culinary competition.
The chefs won the trip at the Korean equivalent of the Iron Chef competition, Meat and Livestock Australia's Black Box Culinary Challenge.
Fourteen teams had an hour to produce a four course meal from ingredients including Australian beef and lamb.
Interpreter Jinny Kim says the competition is fierce.

Wool growers seek Wool Poll audit
A group of wool growers has lodged a complaint against Australian Wool Innovation (AWI), accusing it of failing to conduct this year's Wool Poll transparently.
The five growers from WA and New South Wales, want to know why 50,000 voting packs were sent out, when there are only 30,000 eligible voters.
The growers have called on the Australian Securities and Investments Commission to make sure AWI employees do not count or tabulate the votes and are seeking an immediate post-vote audit.
Signatory Shane Edwards who was an unsuccessful candidate for the AWI board in 2005, says he has real concerns
"There's a number of people that have contacted me and opinion around [is] that we're not too sure whether that satisfies true and democratic process," he said.
"So we feel it's important to keep asking these questions because the question is this, what has AWI got to hide by denying this democratic process?"
But AWI says this group of growers continues to try to destabilise the Wool Poll, which it says is transparent in every way.

Japan worried about milk supply during drought
Research and development organisation Dairy Australia says milk may have to be redirected from new overseas markets to maintain supplies to Japan.
Managing director Mike Ginnivan has just returned from the country, where he met buyers worried about the drought's impact on the supply of Australian milk.
Japan receives 20 per cent of Australia's dairy exports and is seen as one of our strongest buyers.
Mr Ginnivan says other Asian markets may have to be sacrificed.
"China is a very difficult market - it's a short term market," he said.

Fishing industry disappointed by orange roughy decision
Tasmania's fishing industry is disappointed by a decision to list the orange roughy as endangered.
It is the first commercially caught species to be listed.
The fishing industry had been preparing for their catch quotas to be slashed to allow stock levels to recover but were not expecting a complete ban.
Neil Stump from the Tasmanian Fishing Industry Council says the decision makes the future of the fishery uncertain.
"I only heard about it yesterday so I haven't had the opportunity to evaluate the potential ramifications but I think it's the unknown, what does this actually mean for us?" he said.
The Federal Government has moved to establish a national standard for biodiesel.
Environment Minister Ian Campbell plans to have a quality standard for blended fuels within months.
John Keniry from the Australian Biodiesel Group says the standard is needed to give consumers confidence that biodiesel will not damage engines.
But he says more government incentives are needed as well.
"In the US for example, there's a blender's credit and in Europe, in effect, a lot of the countries mandating that diesel [say it] has to contain a certain amount of biodiesel," he said.

Wool market closes the week lower
After its recent strong run, the wool market has suffered a slight correction, finishing the week almost 2.5 per cent lower.
The eastern market indicator fell 19 cents to 825 cents a kilogram.
Analysts say the fall suggests that prices have risen too fast in recent weeks as buyers become nervous about future wool supplies due to the drought.
There was still strong competition from Italian and Chinese buyers at the Newcastle sales, especially for broader microns.
But Craig Brennan from Elders says it could be tougher next week, with many producers trying to make the most of the higher prices.
"Due to the large rise last week the Sydney sale has blown out, originally it was 28,000, it's now increased to 32,000 bales for the week so obviously growers that withheld stock have flooded the market," he said.
"I'd be very surprised if the market held its ground next week with such a considerable offering.

Livestock prices lower in WA
A new report in Western Australia has shown significant differences in livestock prices between the eastern states and the west.
The Department of Agriculture report says saleyard prices for all stock classes except porkers are well below those on the eastern seaboard.
Trade steer prices were 14 per cent lower and export lambs 16 per cent lower between March 2003 and September this year.
Tim D'arcy from the Pastoralists and Graziers Association says it is a dramatic difference.
"It probably averages 50 cents a kilo year in and year out, but it varies anywhere between about 20 or 30 cents up to $1.28 a kilo and we're always that far behind," he said.

Greens hit out at Senate inquiry rejection
The Greens are angry at the rejection of a proposed Senate inquiry into the future impact of climate change on rural communities.
The party lodged a motion in the Senate calling for an investigation into what research is being done to manage lower rainfall on farms.
The motion was defeated 33 votes to 31.
Greens Senator Rachel Siewert says CSIRO and ABARE have told the Senate that no Federal Government agencies are working on a comprehensive strategy.

NSW to increase renewable energy targets
More wind farms are expected to be built in New South Wales after the State Government's decision to increase targets for renewable energy.
Ten per cent of all energy will need to be from renewable sources by 2010 and up to 15 per cent by 2020.
Already a new $220 million wind farm has been announced for Tarago in the state's south, while another development is tipped for Woodlawn, near Goulburn.
State Planning Minister Frank Sartor says more projects will follow.
"There's going to be opportunities for wind farms, for solar, biogas, a bit more hydro in some niche schemes in the state," he said.

Meat processor offers cash incentives to find new workers
South Australian-based meat processor T&R Pastoral is offering cash incentives to try to attract new abattoir workers.
The company is looking for 80 employees interstate to work in plants at Murray Bridge and Lobethal.
Spokesman Brian Deavey says both meatworks are operating at full capacity as farmers destock and the additional labour is urgently needed.
"We actually are assisting with relocation costs and housing for people right around Australia to come to Murray Bridge and to Lobethal, our two South Australian plants to work," he said.

Grown in Australia label a step closer
The food processing industry is closer to developing a new label to clearly show whether food has been grown in Australia.
Producers and some processors are concerned that current labels are misleading when it comes to how much Australian product is included.
The Federal Government has set up a working group to examine the issue and member David Gartrell says they have developed a workable proposal.
"What the working group endorsed at the moment is implementing a grown in Australia logo that would extend original brand options for packaged food products beyond the existing made in product of," he said.

School children encouraged to grow 1m red poppies
A South Australian farmer is trying to encourage school children to grow a million red poppies to replace the plastic flowers we buy to mark Remembrance Day on November 11.
The poppies symbolise the French battlefields where thousands of young Australians lost their lives during World War I.
Nic Kentish from Mount Gambier has developed pre-packaged kits with seeds, pots and instructions, to encourage students to grow the real thing to raise funds.

Govt unable to contain sugar cane smut disease
The Queensland Government has conceded that it is unable to contain the devastating disease, sugar cane smut.
It was confirmed late yesterday that smut has reached the Mackay area after it was first found near Bundaberg in June.
The industry has now turned its focus to limiting the economic impact on the billion dollar sector.
Eion Wallace, from the industry's research and development arm, BSES, says smut may have been in Mackay for some time.
"The evidence at the moment would suggest that it's an incursion that occurred certainly before harvest and probably before this season, probably," he said.
"Which means that it is not a failure of containment from Bundaberg and Childers but a separate incursion either at the same time as Bundaberg and Childers, or subsequent to it."
South of the border, the sugar industry has launched a new round of crop surveillance.
Rick Beattie, from the New South Wales Sugar Milling Co-operative, believes the disease may have been spreading for at least a year but not been detected.
He is asking farmers to check crops, so the disease can be detected early if it is there.

NT campaign aimed at controlling brumby numbers
Authorities in the Northern Territory are developing an education campaign to try to control the number of wild horses on Aboriginal land.
It is estimated that up to 90,000 brumbies live in the Territory, and Parks and Wildlife has concerns about the environmental damage they are causing.
Senior wildlife ranger, Kym Schwartzkopff, says the horses have been allowed to run free and breed up.
"It is very hard to work with people out there that have got an affinity with an animal, so it's a kind of tread lightly area," he said.

Precise food labelling 'closer'
The food processing industry is closer to developing a new label to clearly show whether or not food has been grown in Australia.
Producers and some processors are concerned that current labels are misleading when it comes to showing how much Australian product is included.
The Federal Government has set up a working group to examine the issue, and member David Gartrell says they have developed a workable proposal.
"What the working group endorsed at the moment is implementing a 'grown in Australia' logo that would extend original brand options for packaged food products beyond the existing 'made in', 'product of'," he said.

Rio Tinto hails emission-cutting pig iron process
Mining giant Rio Tinto has developed a revolutionary method of producing pig iron for steel making that could slash greenhouse gas emissions.
Known as HIsmelt, the new technology has taken 25 years and $1 billion to develop, and could replace high energy use blast furnaces around the world.
Managing director of the HIsmelt Corporation, Stephan Webber, says the process still requires iron ore and coal, but removes the need for massive coke ovens.

Graincorp says lower harvest estimate 2 million tonnes
Grain handler, Graincorp, is sticking by its forecast harvest of two million to four million tonnes across eastern Australia, despite the worsening drought.
The latest figures show 94 per cent of New South Wales is now affected by drought.
But Graincorp's central regional manager, Murray Wilkinson, says some areas are producing better yields than expected.
"North Queensland and Moree are going to exceed those forecasts that we had in to make-up the numbers, and it looks as though Dubbo will as well," he said.
"At this stage we're up to one point two million tonnes in the system and I suppose the lower end of the forecast is looking promising at this stage."
Only two per cent of New South Wales is now rated as having satisfactory conditions.

Sheep genome mapping nearly complete
Science is one step closer to providing farmers with a complete genetic map of the sheep.
The 'virtual sheep genome' project has mapped 98 per cent of the sheep's genetic make-up.
That is enough to fast track the identification of the crucial genes for wool and meat quality, and even parasite resistance.
Dr Robert Forage, who is leading the joint Australian Wool Innovation/Meat and Livestock Australia project, says the sheep's genetic jigsaw is still not quite complete.
"It's put together using bits and pieces of information not only from the sheep but also from the cow and from the human as well," he said.
"So we don't have all the information we need from the sheep.
"We've put some pieces of the jigsaw puzzle together but there are still holes in it - we think we know where everything fits but we don't have the complete sequence yet."

Sugar cane farmers brace for smut impact
The Queensland government is trying to assess the economic impact of sugar cane smut on the state's sugar industry.
The crop disease was found at Mackay last week, after first being detected near Bundaberg in June.
The Government is moving away from trying to contain the disease.
The Government has appointed an independent economist to head up a team to assess the impacts and identify measures to manage the problem, and facilitate economic recovery.
The team will report by December 18.
A stakeholder meeting on Friday was told replanting with resistant varieties over the next five years will cost an estimated $800 million, with an additional burden of a 10 per cent reduction in yield.

IR changes to hit rural workers: unions
Unions say new Federal Government plans to allow companies to stand down workers without pay when there is no work will particularly hit rural employees.
The Australian Workers Union (AWU) says the plan to allow stand-downs during natural disasters like drought will leave rural workers without pay and unable to claim the dole at the worst possible time.
Stand-downs are already common with many rural employers, such as abattoirs, but Roger Fletcher from Fletcher International Exports says it is best for companies to negotiate with workers.
"It's vitally important," he said.
"There's no point in someone in Canberra or Sydney trying to run our business in a different area.
"This is important in a lot of things we do across Australia.

Qld Govt mulls water charge freeze
The Queensland Government says it will consider calls for a freeze on water charges.
The lobby groups Agforce and the Queensland Farmers Federation want charges waived for irrigation water that will not be delivered this year.
Natural Resources and Water Minister Craig Wallace says the Government is costing the proposal, but wants the Federal Government to contribute.
"The Acting Premier has given an undertaking to consider the Commonwealth and Agforce to implement water charging rate relief for people who are in exceptional circumstances," he said.

Water a hot topic in Vic election
Victorian farmers say water is their key voting issue in the run-up to the state election later this month.
Transport, the city-country divide and better roads are also among concerns, according to a poll of farmers at the Shepparton sheep sale, in the Goulburn Valley.
"My main issue would be water and Lake Mokoan," said one farmer.
"About the closure of that, it's just not a good thing to happen, it's going to affect communities around this area.
"Whoever provides the most action on water will get the votes."
"Spending less money in the cities and more on the country people, and the water issue - the poor Goulburn irrigators having to pay for water they can't get," said another.
"I'm disappointed in the Government's attitude to farmers our roads and bridges are shocking," another farmer said.
Another, from Tallygaroopna, said water was the biggest issue of the campaign, as did a farmer from Moama:

Water cuts force farmers to make difficult choices
Farmers in south-west New South Wales growing grapevines and citrus trees are starting to consider which areas of their properties they will stop watering as a result of water allocation cuts.
Cheryl Rix from Western Murray Irrigation says irrigators were bracing for another cut to their water entitlements, but no one expected a 32 per cent reduction.
She says horticulturalists need to look at all the available information so they can make sound business decisions.
"I'd certainly encourage growers to really think about talking to their buyers and wineries and working out what will be will be bought next year and chase down the financial counsellors and look at the exceptional circumstances," she said.
"The Department of Primary Industries will be running some sessions starting next week to look at how we can manage water better on farm."
The state's Department of Primary Industries is sending an emergency response team to to help farmers in the Murray and Murrumbidgee regions who have had their water allocations cut.

NSW irrigators say crops at risk after water cuts
Irrigators in southern New South Wales are reeling after unprecedented cuts to water allocations.
Water for both the environment and agriculture has been pared back.
Inflows over the past five months have been the lowest on record and the NSW Government says town water must take priority.
High security and carry over water in the Murray has been cut by another 32 per cent.
While in the Murrumbidgee General security allocations have been cut by 5 per cent and high security users will see a 10 per cent reduction, Murrumbidgee Irrigation's Brett Tucker says agricultural production will be decimated.

Shearers spin yarns at WA reunion
Shearing teams from the 1960s have spent the weekend reliving tales, at the fourth WA Shearers' Reunion near Perth.
The event is to keep alive a part of the state's agricultural history, since the demise of the old shearing teams which spent months on end travelling through the Pilbara and Kimberley.
Don Mercer, 80, was a shearing contractor from Wagin.
"The first year I was running a shearing team I had a shearer who got quite drunk and decided that he'd fire a couple of shots into my room while I was in it," he said.

US Democrats tipped to push for animal ID system
Tthe new-look US Congress is expected to push for mandatory country of origin meat labelling and an animal identification system next year.
Democrats newly-elected to the majority will take the lead in writing the next US Farm Bill.
And Colin Woodall with the National Cattlemen's Beef Association says livestock issues will be key.
"Including country of origin labelling [and] a ban on packer ownership," he said.
"As far as animal ID, we think that also is going to come up."
Meat and Livestock Australia has consistently opposed mandatory labelling for ground beef, which could burden US processors and retailers with costs so high they would reject imported product.

WorkChoices changes leaves rural workers 'vulnerable'
The High Court has dismissed the states' challenge to the Federal Government's new WorkChoices legislation.
The states had argued the Commonwealth's use of the Corporations Act to underpin its new workplace reforms was not constitutionally valid.
The High Court's ruling today says it is.
Tim Kennedy from the National Union of Workers says the decision crushes the award system and leaves low paid rural workers in a vulnerable position.
"Essentially for many many years a lot of rural and regional workers who work for small employers have relied on a state award system and arbitration system to set minimum terms and conditions," he said.
"They basically have ensured the public interest of people getting paid that can support a family if you like.

Chicken deaths blamed on chemical in feed
The deaths of almost 50,000 chickens on two farms near Brisbane has been attributed to an accident involving a load of feed.
The food contained high levels of Nicarbazin which is used to control parasites.
The farms and the feed supplier have not been identified by Queensland Health or food safety authorities.
Dr Andreas Dubs from the Australian Chicken Meat Federation says the 150,000 chickens that recovered from last week's overdose have been cleared for human consumption.
"The chemical is one which is used as medication quite frequently," he said.
"But in this instance it shouldn't have been there and it was present in the feed at a much higher dose than it would normally be used.

Wheat prices fall as panic buying eases
After a bullish run, wheat prices have fallen around $50 a tonne on the domestic market.
Widespread panic buying by millers and feedlotters has eased, with the market falling heavily as more of the nation's crop is harvested.
Chairman of AWB International Ian Donges says there has been a reduction in tender activity and the cash price.
"I noticed back when the harvest started in southern Queensland the market was roughly between $300 and $330-$340 a tonne," he said.

Banks struggle to meet country demand for managers
The big banks say they are finding it hard to attract branch managers to country towns.
Most of the banks say they have doubled and tripled staff numbers in rural areas after the closure of hundreds of branches during the 1990s.
Rabobank has doubled its rural presence to 46 regional offices and employed an extra 140 staff.
Westpac has employed an extra 80 people nationally this year and doubled the size of its graduate program.
The National Australia Bank (NAB) has employed an extra 120 people in its agribusiness unit over last two years.
NAB spokesman Wayne Carlson says the company has had to offer 'sweeteners' to lure more bank managers.

AWI meeting discusses challenges
The major challenges facing the wool industry are being debated today at the annual general meeting of peak body, Australian Wool Innovation (AWI).
Around 200 wool growers have converged on the RSL club in Armidale, in the heart of north-western New South Wales, to hear about the report card on Australian Wool Innovation for the past year.
On the agenda, the progress of the proposed merger with Australian Wool Services despite an estimated $27 million UK super debt, also the court case with animal rights group PETA and the last minute jockeying, hand shaking and electioneering by the new candidates is well under way.
The results of the elections to finalise the new AWI board will be announced later on today.

Dairy farmers to vote on R&D contribution
Australia's 6,000 dairy farmers will go to the polls early next March to vote on how much they are willing to contribute to research and development.
Farmers pay 0.32 cents per litre of milk sold which, coupled with Federal Government support, generates around $50 million a year.
Pat Rowley from Dairy Australia says it is hard to ask farmers to step up their financial support during the drought but it is critical for the industry's future.

Long range forecasters look to autumn rainfall
The Bureau of Meteorology and other long range weather forecasters are predicting a better outlook for drought-hit areas by autumn next year.
But there is still some debate about how much better.
Most long range forecasters agree it is not yet an exact science and they are using different systems.
But David Stephens from the WA Department of Agriculture is predicting an 80 per cent chance of a good autumn break.
In Victoria, independent forecaster John Moore says there is 90 per cent chance of an average year starting with heavy falls in February or March.
Queensland Sunspot observer Owen Beneict expects the dry to continue.

Uranium action plan endorsed
The Federal Government has endorsed a two-year action plan to remove impediments to the growth of Australia's uranium industry.
The Uranium Industry Framework Steering Group has released a report which outlines recommendations for better public information and suggests involving Indigenous communities in uranium mining.
Michael Angwin from the Australian Uranium Association says global demand for uranium is growing quickly.
"The report is going to help Australians think about the industry on its merits," he said.
"It's a factual and dispassionate review of the prospects for the industry and of the impediments to its development.

CBH awaits board approval for Broken Hill mine
A new zinc, lead and silver mine has been given the go-ahead at Broken Hill, in outback New South Wales, that should lead to 90 new jobs.
Sydney-based CBH Resources plans to start work in January opening up an unmined ore body within the famous line of lode.
But general manager of the Rasp mine, Visko Suluchich, says the company board still needs to approve the project.

Rockmelon prices increase
Rockmelon growers in Western Australia's Ord Valley have received prices that are up to 10 per cent higher this year.
Rockmelons are the biggest horticulture crop grown in the region, worth $7 million a year.
Grower David Menzell says the first price rise in 10 years is largely due to a shrinking number of growers across northern Australia.
But transport woes continue to plague growers, who are competing with other crops for trucks.
"Our major issue is that Perth is a relatively small market but that's where the transport was available so a lot of fruit went to Perth that would probably wouldn't have if we had other options and depressed prices there," Mr Menzell said.

'Murchopoly' aims to open people's eyes to pastoralism
A couple of creative women from the Murchison in Western Australia's pastoral region, have transformed the game of Monopoly into their own 'Murchopoly'.
In their version, rather than buying Trafalgar Square, players chase Milly Milly Station.
And rather than going to jail, players go into drought, but thankfully, in this game, you can get out free with a rain card.
Murchison resident Louise Sellenger says the game is designed to show how the area is unique.
"I suppose it's more [about] opening people's eyes to pastoralism itself [and] how different it is to everyday living," she said.
"You've got various bits and pieces to do that aren't normal farming.

Wallaby meat processing industry proposed for King Is
Tasmania's King Island farmers want to start processing wallaby meat after the dismissal of an appeal against culling.
The Administrative Appeals Tribunal ruled against the Wildlife Protection Association of Australia in its efforts to stop farmers shooting and exporting wallabies.
Island land holder Hayden Bostock says the door is now open to develop the local industry.
"It would employ local people, could then cryovac your product, put the King Island logo on there and bang off it goes," he said.
"That would be the most sensible thing to do.

Woolgrowers back AWI directors
Woolgrowers have shown support for the direction of their peak body, voting to retain the current board directors of Australian Wool Innovation (AWI).
Growers have also voted to keep a wool tax of 2 per cent to fund AWI's marketing and research.
Five candidates had nominated for the three available positions on the board, and AWI chairman Ian McLachlan is happy that growers have backed the status quo.
"The board's doing the best it can," he said.
"I don't want to get into a discussion about about people who didn't get onto the board and so forth, all I'd say is that I would like to see these elections conducted in a, for want of a better term, in a gentlemanly fashion, because this industry is far too important to have individuals badmouthed not only at election time but through the whole year, so in the future I would just hope we would march on together because there's some prosperity out there if we get it right," he said.

Healthier oil may lie in Canadian canola
Work is under way to try to develop a healthier oil for commercial cooking.
Canola oil is not suitable for baking, fried foods and margarines because it does not have a long shelf life.
The Victorian Department of Primary Industries is part of an attempt to breed a Canadian canola variety that is resistant to the disease blackleg, so it can be grown in Australia.
Breeder Laura Maher hopes the new oil will be put to the test next year.

Grape growers, orchardists prepare for NSW cold snap
Grape growers and orchardists in the central New South Wales ranges are preparing for a predicted cold snap over the next two days.
Sub-zero temperatures are being tipped, which could bring further frosts, which caused damage to apples, cherries and grapevines two weeks ago.
Angullong grapegrower James Crossing has bought a spray which he hopes can limit frost damage.
"Well currently we are just mapping out low-lying areas of the vineyard to determine the areas that are likely to be damaged by frost, then we will be spraying with a polymer spray to protect those vines from the cold weather," he said.
"We are looking at about $400 a hectare for the chemical and application and we are looking at doing ten to fifteen hectares."

Author predicts new direction for wheat exports
The author of a new book looking at AWB's governance, says there is mounting pressure from grain growers to completely deregulate Australia's wheat export market.
Under the present system, AWB operates the single desk and has the right to veto bulk export applications from any other company.
But director of Australia's National Institute for Governance Stephen Bartos believes that will have to change.
And for the first time, the east coast producer group, the Grains Growers Association, has outlined its vision for the future of wheat exports.

Farmers call for consultation over water crisis
The National Farmers Federation is calling on the Federal Government to give farmers a place at the negotiating table, when deciding policy to deal with the current water crisis.
It says ad hoc state decisions, like the 32 per cent reduction of carry-over water for New South Wales irrigators, are damaging farmer confidence in water security.
NFF president David Crombie is defending the lobby group's role in influencing the debate.

Tasmania outlines water plan
Tasmania is putting forward its case for new developments under the National Water Initiative today.
Primary Industries Minister David Llewellyn is holding talks with Federal Parliamentary Secretary for Water, Malcolm Turnbull.
Mr Llewellyn says Tasmania has water shortages due to the dry season, and needs infrastructure for irrigation, and regional water supplies.

Skills shortages, increased costs hit mining investment
Investment in Australian mining developments remains strong, but a new report says skills shortages and increased prices for materials and construction are causing delays, and driving up project costs.
The Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) says a record 94 projects, valued at $34.9 billion, are in the advanced planning or construction stage.
More than half are in coal and oil, with strong investment in iron, nickel, gold and alumina.

Involve agriculture in carbon trading talks, adviser says
An adviser in carbon trading says the agriculture sector needs to be involved in talks about setting up an Australian trading system.
Carbon trading encourages companies to offset the release of greenhouse gases, by planting trees or paying someone else to plant them.
Prime Minister John Howard wants to set up a taskforce to develop a carbon trading plan.
Tony Beck from the Australasian Emissions Trading Forum says agriculture's role as a carbon sink needs to be taken into account.
"We don't know a lot about what's going to be involved," he said.

Wagyu property on market for $110m
A unique beef property in the mid-west of Western Australia has hit the market with a price tag of $110 million.
The 30,000-hectare property includes 20,000 head of the elite breed of Wagyu beef.
Selling agent John Garland says the asking price is strong, despite the dry conditions that have been felt across much of WA this year.
"We're not seeing any fall back in prices at all," he said.
"If anything, one can say its been a constant, contained firming of values.
"Certainly there's a premium involved in the culmination of the cattle and land here.
"The price at what we only say is around two and half thousand a hectare in general terms is justified, if with it, goes the herd of 20,000 Wagyu head of cattle."
Meanwhile, one of Australia's most famous cattle station resorts has shed its interest in livestock.
El Questro, in northern Western Australia, was sold to an international tourism group for $17 million earlier this year.
The Voyages, Hotels and Resorts Group has sold its 5,000 head of cattle, and agisted the property's 404,000 hectares.
Spokesman David Hedges says the decision will allow the company to focus on its core business.

Biodiesel club to produce cheaper fuel
Farmers in north-west Victoria have formed a biodiesel club to produce cheaper fuel.
The Sunraysia biodiesel club has about 25 members and is experimenting using recycled fish and chip shop oil, and plans to grow crops specifically for biodiesel.
Club member Paul Geering hopes the locally produced fuel will reduce costs for members by about half and says the final product depends on the quality of the original oil.

Burdekin River regeneration underway
Work has begun on the regeneration of the Burdekin River catchment in North Queensland.
The Burdekin is one of nine Australian rivers to be targeted by Greening Australia's Rivers to Recovery program.
Spokesman Bob Osborne says the Burdekin is one of the most endangered ecosystems in Queensland, with the project to take up to 20 years, and cost around $20 million.
"We're trying to get less nutrients in the water, which means more money for farmers; get rid of the weeds in the water system, that brings back oxygen, that brings back fish and that gets the community in," Mr Osborne said.

Ram breeders on show
The Ram of the Year is a feature event of the annual Monaro merino ram sales in southern New South Wales this week.
Buyers from across the country are being selective in their purchases during the drought.
Winning ram breeder John Shiels, of Cottage Park, is going out on a high, retiring after 56 years of breeding and selling, and hopes the industry has a strong future.

Severe frosts prompt call for financial help
Tasmanian apple, pear and cherry growers are calling for financial assistance following record severe frosts in the past two months.
Fruit Growers Tasmania has started talks with the state and federal governments, asking them for interest rate subsidies and to waive the asset test for Centrelink support.
President Tim Reid says some growers have lost 90 per cent of their crops and many will not have a positive cash flow until the harvest in early 2008.

O'Connor to fight preselection decision
Federal Labor's agriculture spokesman Gavan O'Connor says he will appeal against his party's decision not to support him as an election candidate.
Mr O'Connor lost preselection in his Victorian seat of Corio earlier this year.
Leader Kim Beazley says Mr O'Connor will not be removed from as the Opposition's agriculture spokesman before next year's federal election.
Mr O'Connor says he is determined to stay on.
"I don't intend to roll over to a bunch of factional spivs," he said.

Snowy Hydro accused of putting power before people
Irrigators in southern New South Wales are accusing electricity generator Snowy Hydro of putting power before people.
The company is under fire for holding back water from the Murray River.
Murray Irrigation says cut backs to water allocations have put stock and domestic supply to up to 2,000 farms at risk.
Director Kel Baxter says although Snowy Hydro is legally allowed to hold back the water it is morally wrong.
"I don't want to see the power grid fail we've got to have power but a little bit of power rationing because we're short of the water to generate the electricity with, is that too much to ask?" he said.
The NSW Minister for Natural Resources, Ian Macdonald says releasing the water would jeopardise electricity contracts.
"Snowy Hydro has enormous contracts that it is bound to abide by and if those contracts are broken then taxpayers will pay hundreds of millions of dollars," he said.
Snowy Hydro has refused to comment.
Meanwhile the Victorian Government is planning to resume environmental flows into the Hattah Lakes in the state's north-west.
The program to water red gums was halted on Friday while water resources were assessed.
The Department of Sustainability and Environment says another five gigalitres of water will now be pumped into the area, to top up the nine and a half gigalitres already used.
But Robert Mansell from the Murray Valley Citrus Board says horticulturalists do not want to see water being wasted.
"We all know that there's a shortage of water, we think that it probably needs to be managed a bit better," he said.
"It is just a principle in a time of drought.

Grain demand boosts index
Strong demand for grain in the global market has helped to boost the Westpac-NFF Rural Commodity Index for October.
The index rose 6.4 per cent on the back of global price gains in wheat, barley, beef, canola, dairy and wool.

Coles Myer planning to double homebrand range
Coles Myer says farmers should not fear the growth of generic homebrand lines.
The company, which owns the Coles and Bi-Lo supermarket chains, is planning to double its homebrand range to 2,000 products within the next few years.
Many fruit and vegetable growers are worried that the supermarket giant will buy low-quality, cheap imports to fill the range.
But group quality manager Jackie Healing says the move should be looked at as more of an opportunity than a threat.
"This is northing to be worried about," she said.
"The growth of house brand is a fantastic mechanism for driving quality and customer satisfaction, growing sales and increasing loyalty to the Australian market.

MLA defends red meat campaign in light of breast cancer research
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) is defending its campaign encouraging people to eat more red meat, despite new US research suggesting it can cause an increased risk of breast cancer.
Harvard University surveyed 90,000 women between the ages of 26 and 46 over 12 years.
The university says the results showed there was an increased risk of breast cancer, particularly from the regular consumption of processed meats.
But MLA's general marketing manager David Thomason says the "eat red meat" campaign is also based on scientific research.
"We don't discount any research," he said.
"I mean it's important in nutrition research to see it in context.
"There are no two nutrition research studies that necessarily show the same result and this is one study amongst many.

Incitec Pivot announces record profit
Fertiliser manufacturer Incitec Pivot has announced a record after-tax net profit of $83 million, up 73 per cent on last year.
Over the past 12 months internal cost cutting has shed 100 jobs, shaving $30 million off costs.

Qld producers look to cattle from interstate
Cattle from South Australia and Victoria are being sent to Queensland because seasonal conditions have improved in the past few weeks.
Jack Gleeson from Elders in South Australia says many Queensland producers are holding onto their cattle after recent rain and the market is looking for livestock from interstate.
He says the rain has not produced more feed for livestock yet but it has changed market attitudes.
"It hasn't necessarily produced a huge body of feed in two weeks but the perception of the industry there is that their season has taken a turn for the better," he said.

Drought may force return of livestock
Farmers in south-west Victoria who have been "parking" dairy cows from drought areas, say they may soon have to send them back.
The big dry is now spreading to high rainfall areas forcing farmers to begin hand feeding.
They are also worried that drinking water will run out before the end of summer.
Bernard Baxter from Simpson says farmers will have little choice but to send livestock home.
"I think that will come to a grinding halt," he said.
"It's going to be life support mode at the moment and everybody for themselves to basically reassess the situation because only about a month, six weeks ago we still could have had the best year ever possible if the rains had of continued because it has turned for potentially the worst for our area here.

Ag machinery company folds
A South Australian agricultural machinery business is the latest victim of the drought.
Heaslip Products has gone into voluntary liquidation after operating for 100 years.
Managing director Joff Bound says the company has endured previous droughts but sales this year have have completely dried up.
"The company doesn't have a market because our customer hasn't got any money to buy new machines and he's going to have a bit of debt to repay probably after this drought disappears," he said.

Fishermen not hopeful of major change to illegal fishing surveillance
Fishermen in the Gulf of Carpentaria are not expecting too much out of a meeting between federal Fisheries Minister Eric Abetz and his Indonesian counterpart today in Brisbane.
Senator Abetz is expected to ask the Indonesians to help patrol northern waters to curb illegal fishing but local fishermen say that will not address the damage already done to their fishery by foreign boats.
Chairman of Gulf fishermen Gary Ward says greater surveillance would be welcome but he is not hopeful of major change.

Rock lobster fishers hopeful of price recovery
Tasmania's rock lobster industry expects prices to finally recover to pre-SARS level this season.
Fishermen have struggled with low prices since the SARS virus decimated Asian markets in 2003.
Rodney Treloggon from the Tasmanian Rock Lobster Fishermen's Association says the early signs of buoyant markets in China are promising.
"I don't think the general community realises just what a devastating effect SARS had right throughout the fishing industry, not just the rock lobster fishery," he said.

Snow falls surprise NSW residents
An unseasonal cold snap sweeping through Victoria and Tasmania has taken parts of New South Wales by surprise.
After falling for most of yesterday, snow is still lying on the ground across the Monaro and southern tablelands.
There are also reports of snow falling at Armidale and Walcha in the state's north today.
Robert Taylor from Cooma says they can get snow at any time of the year.
"Not often but it does happen," he said.
"My father has seen snow on this place every month of the year throughout his lifetime, not all in one year, but during his lifetime he's seen it.

Tuckey's AWB plan creates further uncertainty for growers: Joyce
Liberal MP Wilson Tuckey is under fire for planning to ask Parliament to vote on removing AWB's veto powers over wheat exports.
National Senator Barnaby Joyce says Mr Tuckey's plans for a private member's Bill creates further uncertainty for growers.
Mr Tuckey wants the veto removed so WA grain growers can sell their wheat to another exporter for a higher price.
But Senator Joyce says the enemies of Australia's single desk for wheat exports in the US and Europe will seize on any disunity within the Federal Government.

AWI and PETA case will go to trial
A Federal Court judge has told lawyers for Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) and People for Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) that their case has chewed up too much time and a trial date will be set.
Justice Rares made the order today, two years after the AWI launched legal proceedings against PETA over its attack on mulesing and live exports.
He ordered all parties to appear before him on December 14 for what he described as a "substantive case management debate".
The judge said the time had come to bring some order to the case, in which AWI and 101 wool growers are suing PETA for its campaign aimed at getting international retailers to boycott Australian wool.
Justice Rares told lawyers they must present all evidence and full witness lists, and asked them to consider if they want a jury trial.

Mining company signs carbon trading deal with graziers
A major mining company has signed a carbon trading agreement with Queensland graziers, paying them to keep their trees for the environment.
In a landmark deal, Rio Tinto will pay three landholders in the Charleville area well over a million dollars to offset the release of greenhouse gases.
Broker Mark Jackson from the Carbon Pool company says it does not mean the land is off limits.
"They continue their current management of the land, which is to say leave the current vegetation intact, continue with sustainable grazing activities so that the land is not locked up and doesn't become infested with weeds and feral animals, and they're relinquishing their right to clear," Mr Jackson said.

US Farm Bill will have strong farm income protections
The new chairman of the US Senate's Agriculture Committee says the next US Farm Bill will have strong farm income protections, despite a global push to cut subsidies.
Tom Harkin argues the White House has siphoned billions (of dollars) from renewable energy, rural development, research and conservation, and he plans to fix that.
But Mr Harkin is also committed to farm supports in next year's US Farm Bill.
"I will continue to view a good, sound system of farm income protection as essential," he said.
And Mr Harkin promises to finally implement long-delayed mandatory country of origin meat labelling, strongly opposed by Australian producers.
"USDA has had plenty of time to figure out how to make it work. So you can bet your bottom dollar it's going to be part of our farm Bill," Mr Harkin said.

Road infrastructure making it harder for grain transporters
Bulk grain transporters say Australia's road infrastructure is so poor they are having difficulty carting this year's reduced harvest from silos.
The Australian Livestock Transporters Association says its Western Australian and New South Wales grain carrier members are carrying more grain this year because rail operators have scaled back their harvest work.
Executive director Luke Fraser says a lot of the crucial network is not suitable for bulk carriers, so transporters face the expense and time delay of navigating a series of different state permit systems.
"We're finding it increasingly around the country," he said.

Harvester safety reviewed
Several hundred harvesters in New South Wales might have to be fitted with a safety device after the settlement of a high profile court case.
WorkCover is withdrawing its prosecution of machinery manufacturer CNH Australia and a New South Wales dealer over a 2003 farm accident, where a worker lost his leg while trying to clear a blockage in a combine harvester.
CNH Australia's Stuart Redman says the company has agreed to design, test and fit a device to make the particular model of header safer.
"It's probably going to be like an interlock device on the ladder accessing the top of the combine and once the farmer pulls down the ladder then it will cut off the machine. It's still very much in design and test phase at this stage but that's what we will be looking at," Mr Redman said.
The agreement only applies to the case IH 2388 header in use in New South Wales.

SA ban on GM crops extended
A moratorium on genetically-modified crops (GM) in South Australia has been extended to 2008.
The Upper House of the State Parliament passed the extension Bill last night after motions by the Greens and Democrats to extend the ban to 2009 were defeated.
The decision brings SA into line with the crop bans in Victoria and New South Wales.
SA Democrats leader Sandra Kanck believes the drought is being used to push the introduction of drought-tolerant GM crops but says the technology is not yet ready.
"The lobbyists for GM foods and GM crops are very, very effective and there is this desire that's held out to people that you could make more money," she said.

Talks aim to lift live sheep export ban
The Federal Government is in talks with Israel to try to lift a ban on live sheep exports from Australia.
The ban was imposed after six sheep were found to have scabby mouth disease on a shipment last month.
Israel buys just 1 per cent of Australia's live sheep exports and 6 per cent of live cattle.
Livecorp's Cameron Hall has confirmed 241 cattle died on another shipment to Israel this month and he says Australia's reputation could be harmed.

Dairy industry task force to help farmers
Major milk processors are offering dairy farmers interest free loans for additional water and feed to help them through the drought.
As the dry threatens to lift costs and cut production, processors will also set up a dairy industry drought task force to help farmers get access to government funding.
The Dairy Farmers Milk Co-operative has announced it will spend nearly $8 million to help farmer members.
And Ross Greenaway from Murray Goulburn says additional water is an integral part of their package.
"People that are buying temporary water on the market we're about to announce that we will be extending that interest free finance from the beginning of October," he said.

Abetz secures agreement for coordinated fishing patrols
The Federal Fisheries Minister says he is confident that Australia and Indonesia can work together to crack down on illegal fishing in our northern waters.
Senator Eric Abetz met with the Indonesian Fisheries Minister yesterday and has secured an agreement for coordinated patrols along fishing zone boundaries.
He says Australia does need to be self sufficient in the fight against illegal fishing but says support from Indonesia will help.
"The Indonesian Minister was very supportive of the concept of coordinated patrols which would see the Indonesian navy patrolling on its side of the border," he said.

Beef producers' income increases
Beef producers in Australia made more money this year, according to the annual farm survey by the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics.
Chief commodity analyst Terry Sheales says while the final figures have not been analysed, 2005/06 shows a substantial income increase.
He says it is the temporary result of better prices, better seasonal conditions and improved productivity

French judge praises Australian wine quality
A French wine writer who is judging at the National Wine Show in Canberra has praised the quality of Australian wine.
The premium show only takes wines that have previously won gold and silver medals.
Michel Bettane has 15,000 wines in his a bulging cellar and believes Australian wines are improving every year.
"I think the average quality is higher for the best wines because the wines are more precise, more elegant and perhaps more complex," he said.

Water restrictions may be toughened in Adelaide
The South Australian Cabinet is considering tougher water restrictions for Adelaide by the end of the year.
The River Murray Minister, Karlene Maywald, says she is disappointed that the city's consumption has increased since restrictions took effect.
She says stronger limits are needed because of a lack of understanding in Adelaide about the seriousness of the water shortage.
"I'm certain that Adelaide people don't understand the severity of the situation because we need to get that this is not a normal circumstance and this is the worse drought in history," she said.

Drought claims grain exporter
Best Western Commodities, a major container grain exporter at Grenfell in New South Wales, has appointed an administrator after business slowed due to the drought.
The company says there are no outstanding debts to farmers or carriers but there are a number of major creditors.
Patrick Haire, from the Rural Market and Supply Association, says farmers should check out all of the organisations they are doing business with.
"Our members encourage farmers to come and sit down, and talk with them if there are any concerns by growers about the merchants they are dealing with," he said.

Wheat growers to be consulted over changes to single desk
The Deputy Prime Minister says the Federal Government will consult wheat growers, before making any changes to the single desk export system.
Western Australian MP Wilson Tuckey is threatening to introduce a private member's Bill in the Senate, calling for the removal of AWB's power to veto export applications.
Other Government MPs are also calling for the veto to be removed once the Cole inquiry report is handed down.
But Mark Vaile says the Government is not going to be rushed into any hasty decisions.
"The Cole inquiry is focused on the activities of three companies, what you're talking to me about now is the future arrangements to manage and market the Australian wheat crop," he said.

Drought support package extended
The Federal Government has further extended its drought support package.
The Drought Force program, which allows farm employees who have been laid off to receive income support while still working on properties, will be expanded to other fields like harvest contractors.
The Workforce Participation Minister, Sharman Stone, says they will be allowed to work 30 hours a week up from 15 and receive a $1,600 training grant.
"If you're volunteering to work back on the farm while you're receiving your unemployment benefits and it's a full time commitment you've made, 30 plus hours, you won't have to keep your job seeking up, you don't have to keep presenting a diary saying you've looked for so many jobs, gone to interviews and so on, and that really means you can concentrate on that farm work," Ms Stone said.

Murray Irrigation slashes farm water supply
Irrigation water to hundreds of farms in southern New South Wales will be cut off next month as Murray Irrigation concentrates on maintaining supplies for stock and domestic use.
The company says irrigation will be restricted to areas close to the main channels, with consideration for contracted crops, feedlots and dairy farms.
Murray Irrigation chairman Stuart Ellis says the restrictions are necessary to prevent the whole system running dry by Christmas.

Farmers march on Vic Parliament
Farmers have rallied in Melbourne today to raise awareness of rural issues in the final week of the Victorian state election.
Farmers on horseback and on tractors have been part of a procession through the central business district to Parliament House.
Goulburn Valley farmer Col Grinter says he is marching over having to pay for irrigation water he will not receive this season.
"If the Government is fair dinkum about helping us, well the first thing they can do is pay for any water that we're not going to get, you know for a farmer to be lumbered with a $20,000 water bill for example and not get any production out of it it makes it pretty darn hard," Mr Grinter said.

Put down malnourished stock: RSPCA
The RSPCA is calling on sheep and cattle producers to put down any livestock which are falling down due to lack of feed or water.
The call comes after a Western Australian livestock producer was fined $25,000 after being charged with six counts of animal cruelty.
The RSPCA says it found some sheep dead in a paddock, while officers were forced to put down another six.
RSPCA prosecutor Robin Moore says all producers have a responsibility to livestock and the drought is not an excuse for mistreatment.

Frosts may halve crop production
Unseasonal frosts in Queensland's cropping region could halve production for some broadacre farmers.
Below average temperatures on Friday brought frosts and even snow to some parts of the Granite Belt in the state's south.
Crop specialist Paul McIntosh says while they're still assessing the damage, it already appears significant.
"There's sorghum, grain sorghum, corn, forage sorghum and even the feed values like Dolichos lablab, and some of those softer crops they are absolutely black, and the Eastern Downs is definitely the big area that's been hit," Mr McIntosh said.

Grain audit under consideration
The Federal Agriculture Minister says he will consider an annual national audit of grain stocks.
The Grains Council has called for the audit to address uncertainty about the level of grain held in storage.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics is currently investigating this year's dramatically drought-reduced stocks.
Peter McGauran says with ongoing uncertainty over how much grain will be available for export or domestic livestock feed this year, the Government is continuing to process 40 applications to import grain.

Chaff carts trialled in weed fight
Grain growers in Victoria are trying to find ways to tackle herbicide resistance, especially as the big dry drags on.
Farmers are trialling chaff carts, large enclosed trailers that are towed behind headers and collect screenings, and small seeds that would normally be left in the paddock.
Bernard Noonan from the Wimmera Conservation Farmers Association says they have been used successfully in South Australia.

Hunt under way for Australia's best young truckie
The trucking industry has launched a national campaign to find Australia's safest and most skilled young driver to try to change public perception about the sector.
The winner will receive a $220,000 prime mover.
The competition has never before been held in Australia but has been a big hit in more than 30 countries.
Stuart St Clair from the Australian Trucking Association says the competition is an attempt to tackle any negative images of truck driving.
"The whole purpose of this is to show to the general public and to the industry itself about the professionalism of the industry and the fact that we're looking to attract young people into this business as drivers and other support people," Mr St Clair said.

SA investigates wine partnership with Chile
The Chilean Government is looking at a partnership with the wine industry in South Australia's Barossa Valley.
Chile's Foreign Minister and Ambassador have made a flying visit to the region to talk about a joint effort to sell wine to Asia.
State MP Ivan Venning says although Chile is a major competitor, it is worth investigating.
"I was initially quite cautious because why would you want to do a deal with an international competitor, as Chile is with us, in the world of wine but I think the Australian wine, particularly our Barossa wines and the Chilean wines do complement each other because they don't have the premium reds like we have," Mr Venning said.

Farmers may look to cooperatives for protection
Agricultural cooperatives could be about to make a comeback, according to new research.
Author Gary Lewis has been looking at farm cooperatives in Australia and says by allowing many to be corporatised, farmers have lost an important weapon.
He says farmers need to look after their own interests when it comes to drought, water and politics, and forming new cooperatives is one way of doing that.

City folk urged to 'sponsor a cow' to support dairy farmers
Citysiders are being encouraged to "sponsor a cow" to help a group of Victorian dairy farmers feed their livestock.
The Stanhope and District Development Committee has come up with the plan to help the district survive the drought.
Chairman Bob Holschier says the campaign will benefit the farmers but also help sponsors to learn about the farm sector.

'Functional foods' may help prevent disease
There is a growing trend in Europe to produce so-called 'functional foods'.
The foods are said to help prevent life threatening diseases or curb potential health problems like obesity, heart disease and high blood pressure.
Visiting food scientist Charles Daly, from University College Cork in Ireland, says there is also a trend to match individual human genetics to different food groups to improve health.
"We have different genetic make-up and so that means that we can have different susceptibility to some of the diseases that we mentioned, and that means that by looking at the genetic make-up of sub populations we can target foods to those groups," Mr Daly said.

Watchdog calls for accurate labelling of GM imports
Australia's consumer watchdog has called for any genetically modified (GM) imports to be labelled accurately.
Choice, formerly known as the Australian Consumers Association, has raised the concern amid speculation that a major grain handler is expecting a consignment of GM canola from Canada within the next month.
Domestic canola supplies are tight this season due to the drought.
Choice spokeswoman Claire Hughes says consumers will not know they are eating GM canola oil.
"If we do start to see a large amount of genetically modified canola coming into Australia, if it's going to be processed and used as oil, consumers wouldn't necessarily know if a product they're purchasing has been genetically modified or does contain genetically modified canola oil," she said.
"Because our GM labelling laws don't require a product that has been highly refined, those products don't have to be labelled and canola oil is a good example of that."
Federal Minister for Agriculture Peter McGauran says he is aware of the imports, which are intended for use in oil for human consumption and meal for stockfeed.
He says the consignment has been independently sampled and tested before loading to confirm that only GM lines approved by the Office of the Gene Technology Regulator are allowed in.

Doctors call for rural health community service obligation
The Rural Doctors Association (RDA) claims the Federal Government is more concerned with ensuring people have a phone rather than a doctor or hospital.
It is calling for a community service obligation for rural health, much like the one which forces Telstra to provide services.
New president Dr Peter Rischbieth from Murray Bridge in South Australia says millions of taxpayers' dollars pour out of rural communities to subsidise metropolitan health services.
"They have the ethos that everyone should have a telephone and access to telephone repairs," he said.
"[The] Rural Doctors Association believes they should have access to timely medical services.

Sugar cane smut found on third cane farm
A third Mackay cane farm has been found to have sugar cane smut, confirming fears that the fungal disease is widespread.
The disease has been found on a property, 20 kilometres from the original find near Mackay, which had been discovered on Melbourne Cup day.
Mackay Area Productivity Service spokesman Alan Royal says smut now looks to be well-established in central Queensland.
"It's very, very sad but it's right across the other side of town and the whips were reasonably advanced but they're certainly not big whips like we've been seeing," he said.
"What did frighten me was on the weekend in one row at the initial farm, you know we were seeing whips that were four, five feet long, so it's got a hold there but let's hope we can get on top of it."
Meanwhile sugar cane farmers in Western Australia's Ord Valley are looking for new varieties, because some which were once resistant to cane smut are not any more.
The disease was first found in WA's north-west in 1998.
CJ Ord River Sugar spokesman Wayne Paul says 100 varieties have been tried in the past five years but only a handful have shown promise.
He says smut is also expected to reduce next year's crop.
"Q95 is probably the worst. It's getting a bit of smut now whereas it didn't have earlier on, so that will probably be mostly ploughed out over the next couple of years," he said.

Vegie growers told to change
Tasmania's vegetable growers have been told to change or be prepared to go out of business.
