Bushfires damage NT mango crops
Bushfires have damaged almost ripe mangoes on up to 10 orchards near Darwin, in the Northern Territory.
More than 50 volunteers have been battling the fires across 30 square kilometres in the Darwin River area, south of the territory capital.
With the mango harvest only a few weeks away, senior fire control officer Andrew Turner says the property loss could have been prevented.
"Fire has covered about 110 blocks to date, many of them haven't had any sort of fire planning put in place at all," he said.
"With the grasses, they really need to be managed and many of the land holders out there aren't managing sufficiently.
"Hopefully this event and the coverage that it has got will encourage people to do the right thing and ensure they have a good and solid plan.
"Certainly there is slashing and mowing that can certainly carry on."

Water policy 'ignores climate change'
A Senate committee says current government policies to regulate water have not considered the impact of climate change on future water availability.
The Rural Affairs Committee is investigating how Australia accounts for its water use and allocation.
Its interim report says changing rainfall and temperatures are not reflected in policy initiatives.
Committee chair, Greens Senator Rachel Siewert, says submissions to the inquiry show alarming trends.
"It appears to us that the impact of climate change on rainfall and subsequent water supplies has not been adequately accounted for," she said.

Beef industry worried at US 'grain-fed' labelling plans
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) is worried at US plans to allow beef from cattle that have spent time in feedlots and eaten grain, to be labelled "grass-fed".
MLA regional manager Michelle Gorman says Australia prides itself on being a leader in grass-fed beef.
Ms Gorman says USDA must remember the consumer when it rewrites the rules on grass-fed labelling.
"There are people that are interested in how the animal has been raised ... and we have many other product categories here, whether it's natural, organic, grain-fed," she said.
"It's just another product in the range and there needs to be some accuracy in the type, how the product was and then, how it's labelled."
Ms Gorman says sales of Australian beef cuts in North America are growing month on month, and the grass-fed label is working.

Commodities boom 'going strong' despite prices
The price of oil has hit a five-month low, and gold has tumbled below $US600 an ounce, but one market analyst rejects claims the commodities boom is almost over.
Rob Brierly from broking firm Hartleys says commodity prices have experienced months of volatility, and the current dramatic drop in prices is being driven by speculators.
The lower prices have dragged down the Australian sharemarket by 46 points, but Mr Brierly is confident that a correction is just around the corner.
"We might see a couple more days of weakness, or even a week of weakness but I'm sure it will turn around because the fundamentals are still very strong," he said.
"Inventories are very low for most commodities, there's not a lot of new projects coming on stream in the near term and demand from places like China is still very, very strong."

Coalition parties at odds on fruit, veg code
The Federal Liberal and National parties appear to be on a collision course over the proposed code of conduct for the fruit and vegetable industry.
Designed to give growers more transparency when selling their produce, Industry Minister Ian Macfarlane says the code will not be mandatory.
But Nationals Senator Ron Boswell has told reporter Shelley Lloyd that a mandatory version remains on the table, as originally promised before the 2004 election.
"It was an election commitment that I campaigned on, it was an election commitment that was in an official policy document," he said.
"I'm saying, a mandatory code was a commitment that we gave at the election and that's a commitment they expect to be honoured."
A spokeswoman for Minister Macfarlane says the code will be enforceable, and deliver the same benefits, without costing millions of dollars required to implement a mandatory system.
She says a mandatory code was not Coalition policy at the last election.
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says it will walk away from this week's talks on developing the new code, if its requirements are not met.
Growers and wholesalers will meet in Canberra on Thursday to thrash out the details.
NFF vice-president Charles Burke says the code needs to force wholesalers to provide more information to growers during price negotiations, improve contracts, and include a dispute resolution process.
"What guarantee do we have as producers that this process is going to lead to an outcome?" he said.
"Because we've just participated in the one that didn't.

Hi-tech quarantine lab set up in Darwin
Suspect plant diseases and insects gathered across northern Australia and Asia will now be checked in new secure hi-tech laboratories in Darwin.
More than $3 million has been spent creating the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service's new headquarters.
Plant pathologist Jane Ray says the upgrade includes filter systems to ensure that no material escapes or hitchhikes on staff.
"This facility is specifically designed to handle pathogens of quarantine concern like citrus canker for example," she said.
"Citrus canker could be worked on in the bio-hazard cabinet, which would enable the pathogen to be contained within the cabinet.
"The negative pressure and the procedures and protocols in place would prevent the escape of this pathogen.
"We could actually diagnose it here, rapidly and move for eradication, rather than actually delaying diagnosis as well."
Another hi-tech quarantine lab is due to be constructed in Cairns, North Queensland.

Dorper sheep sale sets record price
Sheep that can produce both wool and meat are becoming increasingly popular, with a South Australian dorper ram fetching the top price of $41,000 at the breed's national sale yesterday.
That is a long way above the top price of $18,000 paid for a merino ram at a major sale just weeks ago.
Buyers and sellers from WA, South Australia and Queensland attended the sale at Dubbo, in central western New South Wales, and Paul Jamieson from Elders says there was an almost 100 per cent clearance rate for the 120 rams offered.

Lindemans to include foreign wine
The Foster's Group says it will sell South African and Chilean wine under its Lindemans brand, which has traditionally been exclusively Australian.
The beverage giant says it is a result of research in key export markets, which shows shoppers buy wine because it is good value for money, rather than its origin.
But some in the local industry says the Foster's research undermines efforts being made to market wine under the "Wine Australia" banner.
Mike Stone from Murray Valley Winegrowers says the move should serve as a warning for wine grape producers.
"How long before we have major Australian wine companies simply buying grapes from the cheapest source?" he said.
"Does it mean that even in a few years' time that Australian wine grape growers will be in competition with growers from other countries?

Farmers threaten legal action over SA pulp mill plans
Local farmers are threatening legal action to halt the development of a pulp mill near Penola in South Australia.
The $650 million mill won conditional approval yesterday, but still needs final Federal Government consent.
But the local landholder opposition group, the No Pulp Mill Alliance, says the development will lower water tables and increase air pollution.
Spokesman Duan Butler says the group is prepared for a fight.
"We've been saying all along that we would go as far as we had to go," he said.

Grain traders question AWB pricing
The latest world crop forecast out of the US has local grain traders questioning why exporter AWB is not offering Australian wheat growers a lot more for their grain this season.
While there is little change to the North American crop outlook, the United States Department of Agriculture has downgraded its estimate of Australia's wheat crop to 19.5 million tonnes.
With supply tighter, and improving overseas grain prices, commodity trader Tony Smith says growers want to know why AWB is not offering higher national pool prices.
"We don't think the AWB's doing the wrong thing if they're being conservative, by any stretch of the imagination, but I think there's a lot of growers out there now thinking, well do I put it in the pool, I'm going to have some real cash flow problems this year, or do I sell for cash?" he said.
"They probably just need to be given a little bit more information than they normally would.
"If the AWB is being conservative by five or so bucks a tonne, then growers won't have a problem with that. But I think they just need to come out and say it."

Murray irrigators face water price hike
River Murray irrigators in South Australia are paying up to four times more for water, as the dry conditions continue across the Murray Darling Basin.
Temporary water prices have reached an average of $165 a megalitre this month - that's an increase from $44 a megalitre recorded this time last year.
These prices have not been seen since restrictions were first imposed in South Australia four years ago.
Low commodity prices and dry conditions have also seen irrigators sell their water entitlements earlier than usual.

Farmers back Wimmera water decision
Farmers have welcomed a decision by the Victorian Government to halt environmental flows down rivers in the Wimmera region.
With water storages at critical levels, the government says the water earmarked for the environment will be reserved for emergencies including fire fighting.
Colin Coates from the Victorian Farmers Federation's Drought Committee,
is worried about how quickly fire brigades will be able to get hold of it.
"It's a long way on a hot northerly day to cart water out this area, so that is a big concern," he said.

Pacific seasonal workers move criticised
A new report condemns the push to import workers from the Pacific to fill seasonal labour shortages.
The think tank Centre for Independent Studies says migration would delay the Pacific region's attempt to address its economic problems.
Instead it wants welfare changes, to encourage Aboriginals and the long-term unemployed into the workforce.
Milton James from Cape York Partnerships employs Aboriginal people from the region to pick fruit along the Murray River.
He supports the idea, but says it is not a quick fix solution.

Analysts downplay mining share price 'correction'
With shares in major mining companies continuing to nosedive, some analysts say the stock market is witnessing an overdue correction.
Prices for metals including copper, iron ore, nickel and zinc have dramatically fallen in recent days, dragging down shares in companies like BHP, Rio Tinto, Woodside and Zinifex.
Stocks analyst Peter Stracken says the weakening US economy is partly to blame, but market sentiment is also settling to a much more sustainable level.
Mr Stracken says while miners are being hit with higher production costs, their stocks are fundamentally sound.
"It has been pretty well a free-fall when you get Zinifex falling 10 per cent yesterday in one day," he said.
"You know, when you look at the longer term share price chart, BHP has come from like, $12 or $18 to $30, so now it's back at $26.
"If you bought in the last 6 months or so you're not looking so good but if you bought 3 years ago you're still going to double your money."
Meanwhile new figures from the Bureau of Statistics show export earnings from the minerals energy sector jumped 32 per cent during 2005-06 to a record $90.5 billion.

Veg industry outlines growth plans
The vegetable industry will aim to double the value of its fresh, processed and packaged vegetables by 2020.
A strategic plan for the industry has been launched this morning in Canberra, just over a year after farmers rallied on the lawns of Parliament House to complain about the impact of cheap imports on their farm businesses.
Tasmanian farmer and campaigner Richard Bovill says the plan aims to improve communication between everyone in the supply chain, from growers to consumers.
"In the past we've focussed on fixing up problems," he said.
"This strategic plan looks to opportunities and looks to investing in creating opportunities. We have to grow the business.

Alice locals encouraged to pull weeds for fitness
A new sporting body in Alice Springs wants to help people become fit by helping the environment.
Enviro Sports Australia will try to encourage people to pull weeds for exercise.
President Adrian James says although it is an unusual combination, everyone is a winner.
"One event I'd like to get started in the not too distant future is something in some of the land around Alice, probably in the Todd River, in sections that are heavily infested with environmental weeds," he said.

Wholesalers promise to fight mandatory fruit, veg code
Fruit and vegetable wholesalers say they will take legal action if forced to sign up to a mandatory code of conduct for the horticulture sector.
Prime Minister John Howard has now flagged the possibility of making the code mandatory, after fierce opposition from the Nationals and farmers to a proposed voluntary code.
Grower groups and market representatives will meet in Canberra tomorrow to debate the proposal.
But spokesman for the Central Markets Association, Andrew Young, says wholesalers will not be forced into a mandatory system.
"The wholesaling sector has continued to take the position that they wouldn't support a mandatory code, and in fact has questioned whether it would be able to be lawfully imposed upon just one sector of the industry," he said.

Whey extract to help cancer patients
A South Australian company has developed a method of using milk to relieve the side-effects of cancer treatment.
An extract from whey, a by-product of cheese-making, has been identified as a potential mouthwash treatment for mouth ulcers which affect around 40 per cent of cancer patients.
Dr Leanna Read from Adelaide-based TGR BioSciences says the product is close to being available for cancer patients.
"We've just entered what's called a phase two clinical trial and that's an important clinical trial which actually will we hope give us definitive evidence that this material really does work," she said.
"We may not require any further clinical trials after that to take it to market.

Victoria joins MIS tax fight
The Victorian Government has joined the fight to save tax incentives for managed investment schemes (MIS).
The Federal Government is considering a crack down on the tax breaks, which allow investors to claim 100 per cent tax relief from projects like timber plantation developments.
Victorian Regional Development Minister John Brumby says the Federal Government needs to consult with stakeholders and clearly outline the proposed changes before pushing through new legislation.
"We've seen something like $321 million invested in Victoria over the past four years," he said.

AWB rejects grain analysts' price claims
Wheat exporter AWB has rejected claims prices being offered to growers for their wheat are not high enough.
Grain analysts believe national pool prices should be at least $10 dollars a tonne higher because of stronger global prices and small crop forecasts.
But AWB pool manager David Johnson says returns are at a fair level.
"They're not so low, we believe. I mean obviously the pool return at this point in time is forecasting prices out to 2007," he said.
"We haven't changed our pricing methodology at all, we are pricing as we normally do.
"We are always vigilant in trying to make our pool return as relevant to the market place as possible." 

Drought impact
Meanwhile as the grain industry struggles to produce a winter cereal crop, new data shows the impact the drought has had on the value of agricultural commodities.
The Bureau of Statistics has released its farm commodity figures for 2004-05, which show a $1.4 billion fall in the value of agriculture.
Analyst Nigel Gibson says they show that a drop in production and prices for winter grains was a key contributor.
"The main cause of that was the drop in the value of crops, which fell by 13 per cent to $17.8 billion," he said.

Lower cotton production forecast
The United States Department of Agriculture is predicting higher demand and lower production of cotton around the world over the next 12 months.
That could result in better prices for Australian cotton growers, with global stocks forecast to be down 1.5 million bales by the end of July next year.
Australian farmers are about to start planting their next crop, but Cliff White from Queensland Cotton says they still need to be cautious.
"[The] next few weeks is relatively crucial as the northern hemisphere crop comes off," he said.
"The big players of the US, China, and India ... what happens there will very much determine how the price goes, but with the numbers that we have just gone through, that draw down in stock, there is a little bit more potential than we have seen in the last marketing year."

Wheat virus spreads
The destructive wheat streak mosaic virus is rapidly spreading across Western Australia.
Western Australia's Department of Agriculture banned wheat imports from the eastern states earlier this year to try to stop the disease entering the state.
That ban was lifted when it was discovered after the virus was found in a commercial crop.
Department spokesman Roger Jones says for the first time, the virus is now being found in crops across the wheatbelt.
"It is a very serious disease if there's widespread infection with the virus in young plants, young wheat plants," he said.

Gwydir to disappear in boundary redistribution
A big campaign in New South Wales to stop the abolition of the federal seat of Gwydir has failed.
The seat, currently held by former deputy prime minister John Anderson, will disappear at the next election under the latest boundary redistribution.
Queensland will gain a seat due to a population drift across the border.
Federal Member for Parkes John Cobb says his seat will be a more manageable size, but it will be harder for the MPs in the much bigger seats of Calare and Farrer to service their communities.
"They've put Tibooburra virtually in the same state as one that runs almost to the south coast or Mt Kosciuszko," he said.
"It is a little puzzling. The far west of New South Wales and Gwydir have been disenfranchised.

Sunbeam Foods recalls products
Australia's largest producer of dried fruit, Sunbeam Foods, has begun a voluntary recall of 12 products.
The company is investigating how metal made its way into a packet of dates manufactured at the Angaston factory in South Australia.

China buys into future uranium mine
Just months after signing an export agreement with the Australian Government, China has bought into a future uranium mine in South Australia.
The Crocker-Well uranium field, 100 kilometres west of Broken Hill, will be developed and operated by the state-owned Sinosteel Corporation, and Australian exploration company PepinNini.
Sinosteel will pump $30 million into the project, which could mean the development of a fifth uranium mine in South Australia.
The joint venture is yet to be approved by the Foreign Investment Review Board, but PepinNini director Rebecca Holland-Kennedy says the company expects to get the go ahead.

Talks aimed at resolving horticultural industry code of conduct dispute
Talks are under way in Canberra between growers and wholesalers aimed at resolving the bitter dispute over a code of conduct for the horticultural industry.
Prime Minister John Howard has agreed to a mandatory system, if a voluntary proposal put up by the Government at today's meeting is rejected.
The key sticking points involve a clear definition of who is an agent and who is a wholesaler, enforceable transparent contracts and a dispute resolution process.

Dry winter forces record yarding
The dry seasonal conditions are forcing record numbers of sheep and lambs onto the market in southern New South Wales.
More than 60,000 head are being offloaded in Wagga today.
The Wagga saleyards is bursting at the seams with a record yarding of almost 40,000 lambs and more than 20,000 sheep.
President of the Wagga Livestock Selling Association Peter Cabot says it has been a dry winter and unless it rains soon the sell off will continue.
"We're seeing a lot of the pastures die and people are now realising they've got six months of summer and they're probably looking at March or April to feed sheep.

Wool supporters confident about marketing campaign
The backers of a new $8 million campaign to market Australian wool in the US say they are confident it will not be hijacked by animal rights groups.
A lucrative deal between Italian fashion house Benetton and Australian Wool Innovation collapsed six weeks ago, with some laying the blame on animal welfare protests against mulesing.
The campaign being launched today will test how effectively fine wool can be marketed to women through New York fashion label Saks Fifth Avenue.
Brenda McGahan from Australian Wool Services says they have addressed the retailer's concerns about mulesing and are confident it will not pull out.
"That's a very difficult question," he said.

NT boy elected to UN board
A young Northern Territory boy from a town of a few hundred people has been elected to a board of the United Nations.
Bradley Lewis, 10, from Mataranka has been made the Asia Pacific representative on the UN's Environment Program Junior Board.
Now responsible for organising the 2008 children's conference in Norway, Bradley says his Aussie attire helped him to get noticed before the election, held at the International Children's Conference for the Environment in Malaysia.
"We didn't have to run a campaign but everyone just went around giving name cards out and presents and that's exactly what I did," he said.
"We gave out Australian flags and little knick-knacks.

Three-legged Tasmanian cow to get prosthetic leg
Tasmania's now famous three-legged dairy cow, Theresa, looks like becoming the first in Australia to have a prosthetic leg.
The heifer had one of her back legs amputated after falling down an embankment and being a valuable asset, owner Geoff Heazlewood wanted to keep her.
He says the response to his call for help has been overwhelming and work has begun on a new prosthetic leg.
"There seems to be a lot of people interested in her welfare," he said.

Farmers' old equipment to help women in Congo
Farmers are being asked to donate old tractors and other farm machinery to help women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Civil war has cut off access to food for many people, with large numbers of women and children suffering malnutrition.
Melbourne-based appeal coordinator Polydor Mutombo says church groups will distribute the farm equipment to co-operatives of women, to grow maize, potatoes and beans.
Mr Mutombo says farming will allow the women to become self-sufficient, something money and food donations cannot achieve.
"Mostly the women are looking for food to feed their families," he said.
"They are the most affected by this war because there is killing mostly of men or men are going into the armies.
"And it's going to help them to look to other things like if they produce that food they can sell, they can pay for schooling for children.

Young farmers forum focuses on biofuel
Up to 150 young farmers are in the southern Queensland town of Goondiwindi today to discuss their role in the future of agriculture, especially in biofuel.
With three proposed grain-derived ethanol plants planned for the Darling Downs, young farmers gathering here today want to know how they can benefit.

Top ag commodity forecaster wraps up after 18 years
Today marks the last day on the job for the head of the nation's peak commodity forecaster.
Brian Fisher has been director of the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics since 1988.
He admits it has not been an easy job to forecast the vagaries of Australian agriculture, but says it has been important to give farmers the most up-to-date information available.
"The facts need to be on the table - sometimes there are more or less diplomatic ways of getting them on the table, but in the final analysis farmers need to know the facts," he said.

Wool market remains steady
The wool market continued fairly constant this week, with the benchmark eastern market indicator closing at 753 cents a kilogram, down just two cents.
The bright spot came at the Melbourne sales, with superfine 16.5 and 17 micron wools gaining up to 20 cents a kilogram.

Summerfruit slashes board numbers
The peak research, development and marketing body for summer fruit growers will cut the size of its board from 21 to 11.
The move by Summerfruit Australia is an attempt to cut costs.
Chairman Ian McAllister says the organisation's finances are low because grower levies have not increased since 1997.

Graziers asked to keep stock off remnant native bush
The dry conditions and high cost of feeding livestock have prompted calls for livestock producers to resist the temptation to graze sheep and cattle on remnant native bush.
Tim Jury from the South Australian Nature Conservation Society says even a little grazing can do substantial damage.
While sympathising with drought-affected farmers, he is asking them to consider the long term picture.
"Dry times are tough on everyone financially and a lack of green feed is no doubt the reason why primary producers will put stock in native vegetation remnants," he said.

Desalination plan prompts environmental concerns
Marine biologists have concerns about a plan by mining company BHP Billiton to build a water desalination plant near Whyalla on the Spencer Gulf in South Australia.
The plant would turn seawater into around 120 megalitres of fresh water a day.
But Marine Science Centre spokesman Toby Bolton at Port Lincoln says it could have a major impact on the marine environment.
"This proposal is to pump 320 megalitres of water a day from the northern Spencer Gulf and return about 200 megalitres of water to the gulf," he said.

Caution urged over fruit fly outbreak
Victorian agriculture authorities are urging residents in the state's north-east to be careful handling fruit in the wake of the fruit fly outbreak just over the border.
The Department of Primary Industries has discovered the pest in the New South Wales border town of Mulwala.
Spokesman Bill Aschroft says fruit cannot be taken out of a 15 kilometre quarantine zone and measures are in place to contain the outbreak.
"People need to be aware that in all of these towns and in fact right across north-eastern Victoria and the corresponding areas on the north of the river, that they shouldn't be moving fruit around because there is a risk that fruit fly will be in the fruit or associated with it," he said.

Locust plague predicted for WA
Just when Western Australian farmers thought this season could not get any worse, authorities are worried about a locust plague.
Locust hatchings have been detected in 36 shires in the northern agricultural region.
The Department of Agriculture says rainfall last week will help them to thrive.
Entomologist Kevin Walden says a large locust outbreak would have a devastating effect on production in the west this year.
"If the outbreak is as big as what we've predicted, then it's going to be over a large proportion," he said.
"Even the hopper can eat approximately its own body weight per day in vegetation.
"And given when you get hopper bands that go across paddocks, basically they'll almost clean the paddock out of all vegetation that's there."

Landmark to slash 50 jobs
One of Australia's largest wool brokers and rural services companies, Landmark, is to axe 50 jobs across Australia as drought conditions and water shortages bite further into the bottom lines of agribusinesses.
Its parent company, AWB, is also reviewing costs.
Landmark says 50 staff will lose their jobs across its offices in Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland and Western Australia.
Company spokesman Peter McBride says a high-cost base and the tough seasonal outlook has forced the company to cut 2.5 per cent of it work force, including back office and shop staff.
"While grain, sheep and livestock are affected, merchandise, fertiliser is also affected," he said.
"Landmark is still a very strong rural business that from time to time, just like any other business, we have to make some tough decision."

Plant closure won't affect pig producers: KR Castlemaine
Smallgoods manufacturer KR Castlemaine has told Queensland pig producers it will still need their pork, despite announcing the closure of its Toowoomba processing plant.
The company's adjoining abattoir will be sold.
A total of 350 workers will be affected when processing is relocated to the company's Victorian base.
KR Castlemaine president Mike Adams has promised to help those who are willing to move south.
He says the company will continue to slaughter up to 8,000 pigs from Queensland producers and transport them to Victoria for processing.
"We were faced with the decision of having one modern factory in Castlemaine and one very old factory in Toowoomba and it just did not make economic sense to try and run two plants," he said.
"We'll continue purchasing pigs in Queensland now and into the future.

Growers, farmers reject code of conduct
Peak vegetable grower group AUSVEG and the National Farmers Federation (NFF) have rejected the Federal Government's proposed voluntary code of conduct for the horticulture sector.
Industry Minister Ian Macfarlane outlined the proposal to provide more transparency to the way growers sell their produce during a day-long meeting in Canberra yesterday.
But questions are now being asked about the number of grower representatives who were from Queensland.
Apart from the NFF, AUSVEG and the Horticulture Council, the four other grower delegates all represented Queensland business interests.
National party Senator Ron Boswell, who has been a staunch supporter of a mandatory code for growers, believes other states were represented.

Defeated Mexican candidate declared 'president'
Tens of thousands of supporters of Mexico's defeated presidential candidate have declared him the president of a parallel government.
Supporters of Andres Manuel Lopes Obrador made the symbolic gesture at a huge rally in the main square of Mexico City.
The protesters are also planning to hold a swearing-in ceremony for Mr Obrador in November, just days before the inauguration of the country's official new president, Felipe Calderon.
Last week, Mexico's highest electoral court declared Mr Calderon, the conservative candidate, had won the election.
Mr Obrador says the size of today's protest shows that support for his peaceful uprising is not waning.
The rally comes on independence day, after seven weeks of peaceful protest against the election result.

Australian Wool Innovation CEO quits
The head of Australian Wool Innovation has quit and will leave the company by the end of the year.
The peak research and development body is in the process of merging with marketing company, Australian Wool Services.
Chief executive Len Stephens says he came to an agreement with the board to leave after being informed a new CEO would be appointed for the merged company.

Japan rejects Australian buckwheat shipment
A shipment of Australian buckwheat has been rejected in Japan due to contamination concerns.
Authorities say the consignment contained three times the maximum residue level allowed for an organophospate insecticide.
Japan has tightened its restrictions on chemical residues and Geoff Brown from Buckwheat Enterprises says all future grain imports could be affected.
"The concern I have is that normal farming practices can still produce chemical residues that are three times in excess of what the Japanese MLR's are for certain chemicals," he said.
"I really think it is an issue that needs to be addressed.

APVMA considers deregistration of Short Chain Ester chemicals
The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA) will announce later this week whether it plans to deregister Short Chain Ester chemicals.
The chemicals are used by farmers to control summer weeds, but in the past spray drift has caused damage to horticulture crops.
It is believed the authority will ban their use from May 1 until August 31 each year, but Geoff Kendell from the Victorian Farmers Federation says a nationwide ban would be disappointing.
"Their modelling that they used was US based, they didn't look at the Australian environment and climate," he said.
"They certainly haven't taken into consideration methodologies that we used and the advanced new techniques that in many cases are world leading.

Business sector blames governments for water crisis
The Australian business sector has criticised the state and federal governments for not doing enough to solve the nation's water woes.
The Business Council of Australia has released a paper which criticises the time it is taking to implement the National Water Initiative, to establish a national water trading system.
Director of policy Maria Tarrant says delays are costing the Australian economy billions of dollars.
"The Business Council's report really identifies that Australia's water supply system is broken and needs to be fixed," she said.

Seeney vows to fight Mary River dam construction
The new leader of the Queensland Nationals says he is determined to fight the construction of the controversial Mary River dam in the state's south-east.
Former deputy Jeff Seeney will take over from Lawrence Springborg in the wake of the Coalition's disastrous showing at the recent state election.
He says water policy is a key area of difference between the Coalition and the Government.
"The answer is to build the dams where the Government had planned to build them for many years and where successive governments have acquired the land," he said.
"The sites are there, but the answer is also to focus on water recycling, to recycle some of the water that is still being discharged into Moreton Bay.
"Peter Beattie talks endlessly about his water grid, he hasn't laid one length of pipe yet, to ensure that water is recycled and the answer is also in pursuing the emerging technologies like desalination.

Fishing industry prepares for $90m license buyback
The fishing industry is set for a major shake-up, with the Federal Government set to spend $90 million buying up fishing licences.
Two hundred licences will be bought back in the first round of the program, designed to ease pressure on the fish stocks and the environment.
Fritz Drenkhahn from the South East Trawl Industry Fishing Association says there will be major changes at most ports.
"It's the biggest change we've had in our fishery ever," he said.
"There will be restructuring on the shore facilities, the ice-maker, the maintenance people, more so the haulage contractor which is now going to be a big issue for the operators left remaining actually getting their fish to market, it's quite an issue.

US calls on Aust to help to restart WTO Doha Round talks
US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns and US Trade Ambassador Susan Schwab will be in far north Queensland this week for the 20th anniversary summit of the Cairns Group.
Mr Johanns and Ms Schwab want Australia's help to restart the stalemated WTO Doha Round of trade talks.
Mr Johanns says Australia has the 'high ground' when it comes to free trade.
"They are free traders, they are very, very supportive of market access and so, during the negotiations over the last couple of years, they have been right there with us, doing everything they can to push the idea that tariffs need to come down, that we need better market access, really, on a worldwide basis," he said.
And Mr Johanns says non-subsidisers Australia and New Zealand are pushing to reduce farm subsidies as well.

Tamed NT water buffalo head to Aceh
The first shipment of trained water buffalo from the Northern Territory is being exported to the Indonesian province of Aceh today.
To see domesticated water buffalo being lead aboard a giant live export ship at the port of Darwin is quite unusual.
But today, buffalo, along with camels, goats and cattle, were being loaded aboard the Deneb Prima, which can carry 20,000 to 30,000 head.
Seven buffalo, six cows and one bull have been specially tamed and trained by Queensland buffalo whisperer Graham Heffernan for remote rural villages in Aceh.
At least 30,000 working buffalo were lost in the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami, and these seven will pull ploughs, carts and carry heavy loads.

Pastoralists urged to diversify for future success
A gathering of pastoralists in the Gascoyne region of Western Australia has been told they need to diversify to shore up their future.
Pastoralists have met in Carnarvon at the third Gascoyne Muster to debate climate change, farm succession and how the industry will look in 2030.
Pastoralist Justin Steadman from Wooromel Station is one of those who have made the shift, with an agriculture and horticulture business about 120 kilometres south of Carnarvon.
"We can carry on doing what we're doing and with a bit of luck and change in management, I believe we can do it well and it will be quite fruitful," he said.

S Kidman and Co make feedlot investment
In a bid to cope with the big dry, one of South Australia's biggest pastoral companies has invested in its first feedlot.
S Kidman and Co has bought Tungali, north-east of Adelaide, and plans to grain feed around 4,000 cattle for the Japanese market.
Chief Executive Greg Campbell says conditions led to the decision.
"Really, we finish cattle on native pastures in the channel country but there are plenty of times, particularly in South Australia, properties see more droughts than they do as you go further east ," he said.

Young farmer of the year considers using prize money for stockfeed
Tasmania's new young farmer of the year says he might have to use the prize money to buy stockfeed unless it rains soon.
Heath Dobson has won $5,000 after proving himself Tasmania's best farmer under the age of 30.
However he says with Tasmania's continuing dry conditions he might be forced to put the money towards feeding cattle.
"We are going to need that bit of water from the sky I think shortly - it's been a very, very dry winter," he said.

Court orders surrender of secret AWB documents
The Federal Court has ordered AWB to surrender nearly half the bundle of 900 documents it tried to keep secret from the oil-for-food inquiry.
The bitter argument over the documents has stalled the inquiry's investigations for the past three months.
In handing down his orders, Justice Neil Young said his decision focused on three issues: whether AWB had established its claim, whether that claim had been waived by AWB's own internal inquiries and whether any fraud, sham or trickery had taken place.
Justice Young said 25 of the documents before him were not legitimate communications between AWB and its lawyers.
He said a further 316 showed AWB had waived its right to keep them secret when it carried out Project Rose and Project Water.
The six documents presented to Justice Young involving the Tigris transaction he described as being brought into existence for an improper and dishonest purpose.
Justice Young added another four to this category.

Diesel users missing out as crude price drops
The price of petrol might be falling but diesel users are not seeing the benefits.
Oil companies are believed to be holding off on passing on the benefits of cheaper crude oil prices, which have fallen from a high of $US77 a barrel in early August to $US64.
While unleaded petrol has fallen by up to 20 cents a litre at the pump, diesel has only fallen 2.2 cents a litre on average across regional Australia.
Geoff Trotter from the independent fuel monitoring group, Fueltrack, says oil companies are profiting at the expense of farmers and the transport sector.

Dry winter impacts on grain crop
The forecast for this year's grain crop has taken another big hit.
The Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics says record low winter rainfall will lead to a 36 per cent drop in production to 26 million tonnes.
Queensland, Western Australia and South Australia are expected to be hardest hit, with the canola crop tipped to be the worst in 10 years.
Barley will be down 40 per cent and Profarmer analyst Richard Koch says current warm weather across south-eastern Australia could slice another 4 million tonnes off the already low wheat crop.
"There's crops from about Narrabri down through Victoria that are in the balance at the moment and would need further rain to guarantee yields," he said.

Hay exports under cloud
A 200,000 to 300,000 tonne shortfall is putting export orders for hay in jeopardy this year.
With dry conditions, forecasts for the oaten hay crop have fallen by half, leaving farmers unable to fill contract orders.
One of the country's largest export companies, Balco Australia, says it will take hay made from failed wheat crops to make up the shortfall.
Marketing director Murray Smith says farmers will not make as much money, but at least they will receive a return for their crops.
"It's probably only about $10 a tonne, mainly because a lot of the wheat is bearded and is not exactly what they want, but hopefully for the growers they can get a bit of a yield from their crop," he said.

Drastic drop in cotton planting expected
The Australian cotton season has begun in central Queensland, although only a quarter of the normal area is expected to be planted.
A small band of farmers have started planting crops, relying on unused irrigation water from last season, since there is no new water available this season because of the drought.
Grower Hamish Miller says he is hoping for better prices, because of the lower crop estimate.
"I could sit here for hours and talk about the price but I think fundamentally from information that I work with and receive I think the market does look like it will move higher in the short to medium term," he said.

Irrigators wary about Govt's water licence plans
The New South Wales Government plans to buy water licences off irrigators to help meet its target for environmental flows in the Murray and Snowy Rivers.
Until now the focus has been on finding water savings, but the Government has now called for tenders to sell water on a permanent basis.
Conservationists have welcomed the move but irrigators in inland New South Wales are wary.
General manager of Murray Irrigation George Warne is worried that if the Government buys the water it will push up prices or reduce access to water for irrigators.
"The State Government has moved straightaway from water savings and its now just fully trying to get into the water market," he said.
"The governments may have given up, I think they might be coming under some pressure to find the water savings and they've decided that a more direct approach works.

River flows reach low levels
River flows in Tasmania have reached their lowest levels since records began 40 years ago.
Terry Leary from the Department of Primary Industries says record low winter rainfall across most of the state has also meant that many farmers have not been able to fill farm dams.
He says it is also unusual that the dry conditions are affecting the entire state, even the usually high rainfall region of the state's north-west.

Rain helps Kangaroo Is farmers
There is one part of southern Australia that seems to be faring better than most.
Farmers on Kangaroo Island off the coast of South Australia say early winter rain has pulled them through.
Even though the island had its driest winter on record, Kingscote farmer Rodney Bell says his crops are still on track and he has never seen his livestock looking so good.

Livestock transport industry slams proposals to combat driver fatigue
The livestock transport industry is continuing its campaign against a draft proposal to crack down on driver fatigue.
Submissions have now closed on the recommendations by the National Transport Commission, to regulate the amount of hours drivers are allowed to work within specific time frames.
George Johnston, from the Queensland Livestock Transporters Association, says the current proposals are unacceptable.
"We thought it was too strenuous for starters for truck drivers to understand and come to grips with, we thought it was just too complex, we think there is economical repercussions down the track," he said.

Workers worried about redundancy entitlements
Workers at the Toowoomba processing plant of KR Castlemaine are worried they will miss out on full entitlements if they look for new jobs before the plant closes.
The company is planning to move its small goods processing operation to Victoria, leaving 350 workers in limbo.
The company has offered to help workers wishing to relocate, but Tom Schulz from the Bacon Factory Workers Union says until it formally notifies staff that the plant is closing, workers who leave will not receive full redundancy entitlements.
"The employees haven't been technically advised they are going to be terminated, there is no actual termination notice been given, therefore if an employee was to leave now they would be entitled only to their accruals in the unused leave," he said.

International College aims to reduce skills shortage
Farmers in Victoria's Sunraysia region are hoping that an influx of overseas students will help to solve the region's skills shortage.
When it opens next month, the Mildura International College will provide horticulture training to 100 students from different countries, with a mixture of classroom and on-farm experience.
Campus manager Bruce Hunter says there is already plenty of support from district farmers.
"We've had people quite interested in having students to learn the profession," he said.

Dohne merinos to be sold over web
The Internet is helping graziers in remote rangeland areas buy sheep that can cope with harsh, dry conditions.
With the growing popularity of the dohne merino breed, producers are about to begin selling livestock over the web, with 5,000 lambs from Queensland listed for the first sale in November.
Graham Coddington from the eastern states Dohne Breeders Association says the web is particularly useful for farmers who are a long way from the major saleyards.
"See there's a lot of dohnes bred a long way from the markets right up in Queensland and western NSW," he said.
"That gives them competition for their product on their property before they (the sheep) leave there, without spending a cent on trucking them somewhere and stressing them all.
"Where they just go straight to where they're destined for, whether it's feedlot, meatworks or breeders."
Meanwhile woolbuyers from around the world will be able to bid for Australian fibre on the Internet.
Elders is set to move its global wool auction onto the web for the first time in November to allow more buyers, exporters and mills to compete.

Fundraising group receives environmental award
A Western Australian fundraising group has been awarded a Golden Gecko for environmental excellence after devising a method to recycle black PVC pipe from mine sites.
It is estimated there are tens of thousands of tonnes of discarded black poly pipe lying around outback mining sites in WA.
Tony Fitz-Gibbon from Ruggies Recycling says the success of the project hinges on transport companies giving their services for free.
"The key to the actual process is the machine that goes out there can be taken out on site and can chop the pipe up into a shredded size, and then we put it in bulker bags and then it is brought back by the transport companies on free backloads," he said.
"In Perth, the actual material is then washed and reprocessed, and granulated, and is then made into either new poly pipe.
"Also we can coat the CCA treated pine logs and make posts for vineyards and that sort of thing with the recycled poly."

Mandatory horticultural code of conduct announced
The Federal Government has announced it will implement a mandatory code of conduct for the horticulture sector after grower groups rejected a voluntary proposal.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran made the announcement in the wake of a meeting last week where the National Farmers Federation and grower group AUSVEG rejected a government proposal for a voluntary but legally enforceable code of conduct.
Designed to provide more transparency for growers when it comes to selling their produce, wholesalers have already warned they will take legal action to prevent a mandatory code being implemented.
The Government has flagged growers may have to foot the bill for the cost of implementing the code.

Govts urged not to give up world trade fight
World farm leaders are urging governments not to give up the fight to free up world trade.
Delegates from the 18 member nations of the Cairns Group are meeting in far north Queensland this week to mark the organisation's 20th anniversary.
They will attempt to find a way to revive the deadlocked Doha world trade talks, with the European Union and the US refusing to offer more concessions to cut tariffs and farm subsidies.
David Crombie from the National Farmers Federation says breaking down market barriers is critical for Australian farmers.
"What we are looking at is a more level base where we can compete more openly," he said.
"We think the EU needs to open up its markets more, we think the Americans need to take away some of their home supports and the developing countries need to have less exclusions."
Federal Trade Minister Mark Vaile has put forward a proposal to try to revive the trade talks this week, but it has been dismissed by the head of America's biggest farm group.
American Farm Bureau president Bob Stallman says despite his high regard for Mr Vaile, he feels Mr Vaile's proposal for a 5 per cent EU tariff cut, side by side with a $US5 billion subsidy cut is unfair.
"The 5 per cent is not much, in and of itself but if you add in the potential effects of sensitive products and the percent of products there, not counting special products for developing countries, that's not going to compensate us for giving up $5 billion."
Mr Stallman said Mr Vaile's plan sounds good, five and five, but that's about the best that could be said for it - it doesn't meet US WTO goals.
Visiting Irish Trade Minister Michael Ahern hopes the world trade talks can be put back on track.
Mr Ahern says improved market access is a key issue because 90 per cent of Ireland's production is exported.
He says there is room to negotiate the reduction of agricultural tariffs and subsidies, but the United States needs to come to the party too.

AWB chief pushes for end to oil-for-food inquiry
With talk of another extension, the head of AWB says the oil-for-food inquiry needs to be concluded as soon as possible, to give certainty to growers already experiencing one of the worst seasons on record.
Company chairman Brendan Stewart says wheat farmers have a tough harvest ahead and believes the current crop estimate could fall further.
He says most growers have had enough of the inquiry and, like the AWB board, would like to see it ended as soon as possible.
"It hasn't been a pleasant experience for any of us and it obviously builds on the level of uncertainty in the industry," he said.
"We want to move as quickly as possible to give the growers the certainty and assurances they're seeking in relation to the 06-07 pool and going forward.

Hot winds add to farmers' woes
Hot north-westerly winds which fanned a rash of small fires across Victoria yesterday have also further reduced the outlook for the state's grain crops.
Temperatures have topped 32 degrees in some regions over the past few days, drying out already stressed wheat, barley and canola.
Agronomists say all of the 1.5 million hectares of crops planted in the Mallee region have been affected, with farmers now looking at harvesting only a third of average yields.
Despite a few millimetres of rain overnight, Ouyen farmer Alan Crook says there is now almost nothing left in his paddock worth harvesting.
"We're probably looking at a desperate situation," he said.
"We had a bit of rain two weeks ago and I guess everyone had a bit of hope of getting some crop.

Dry weather impacts on store sheep sales
The number of spring sales of store sheep in Western Australia has halved due to the dry season.
While the number of sheep being sold for the meat trade has soared in recent months, the amount of sheep being offered to other graziers has dropped off.
In the next 10 days just 28,000 store sheep will be on offer in WA, compared to nearly 170,000 for the same period last year.
Recent rain has boosted some regions, but Ian White from Elders says there is still a lack of both store sheep and buyers.
"Some sheep that look like being sold a month ago, I think the rain's certainly bought a lot of farmers a bit of breathing space," he said.

New machinery sales down
Farmers are spending less money on new machinery, with sales last financial year down by 9 per cent to $1.6 billion.
The Tractor and Machinery Association is blaming the drought for a $150 million fall in the sales of broadacre farming equipment.
With the Henty Machinery Field Days under way in southern New South Wales, TMA executive director Vin Delahunty expects business to be slow.
"What we've got is a situation where farmers stopped spending late last year and really haven't started spending again and that's because they're concerned about their cash flow," he said.

Dairy Farmers Co-op wins homebrand milk contract
The Dairy Farmers Co-operative has won a contract to supply homebrand milk to Coles, Bi-Lo and Coles Express stores across Queensland.
The co-op already has contracts with Coles in South Australia and New South Wales.

NT farmers urged to fill out ag census forms
Northern Territory farmers have proven themselves the worst in Australia at filling out the national agricultural census.
Held every five years, the census collects data on the nation's farm production.
Forms were due back in July, but so far only 60 per cent have been returned from the Territory, compared to 80 per cent elsewhere.
Valdis Juskevics from the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) says the aftermath of cyclone Larry in north Queensland shows the value of the census.
"In the hours after the cyclone in March, Government phoned the ABS and asked what did we know about the farmers in far north Queensland, as in the numbers of farms, the type of farms, their production," he said.
"Within hours we turned that information around from the 2001 census and the next day, the Wednesday, the Government announced a recovery package for farmers."

Conservation work helping people with depression: study
A research project in Victoria has found that working with local conservation groups can help people from rural communities deal with depression.
Suicide rates in regional areas are significantly higher than in the cities.
Deakin University has run a pilot project in Geelong and along the Victorian coast and participant Joanne Farey from Anglesea, says it has helped her.
"We did some activities like propagation, I didn't even know what that was beforehand," she said.

Wholesalers concerned about code of conduct exemptions
Vegetable growers are concerned that a new mandatory code of conduct for their industry does not cover supermarkets, processors or exporters.
The code is designed to provide greater transparency to growers when it comes to selling produce.
The office of Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran has today confirmed the exemptions and says the code will only apply to wholesalers.
Head of the Horticulture Australia Council Kris Newton says she can not believe it.
"That certainly hasn't been conveyed to us. We would be bitterly disappointed if that were the outcome and it's certainly not what we're looking for," she said.
"I haven't had that information from the Minister or the Minister's office so clearly we would need to talk with them and get a straight story about what's going on."
Wholesalers say they will take legal action if supermarket chains are not forced to comply with the mandatory code.
Andrew Young from the Central Markets Association says if the code is anti-competitive, they may take action through the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission.
He believes politics affected the decision.
"The Government had decided to work towards an enforceable voluntary code and then at the twelfth hour this major backflip," he said.
"So we can only speculate that the National party pursued an outcome and had their way at the end of the day."
Some growers and wholesalers in the horticulture sector are questioning the need for the code, which they fear will cost them money.
"We have some very strong relationships with our fruit and vegetable agents across Australia," Mark Boyd, general manager of Tropical Pines said.
"Those are very mature relationships and very open relationships that have been very successful for us.
"So we'll have to wait and see the detail of the code of conduct and actually wait to see how it will benefit us."
"I'm probably a little bit disappointed. It is going to add cost to our business and how we do business, it's hard to quantify exactly how much," Grant Nicholl, wholesaler business manager with Flavorite tomato marketing said.

WTO chief warns of Aust export changes
The head of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) says Australia may have to give up its single-desk export systems to score a win in the Doha round of the world trade talks.
WTO director-general Pascal Lamy has told the Cairns Group summit in Queensland the European Union has problems with Australia's monopoly selling systems for wheat, barley and sugar.
But Federal Trade Minister Mark Vaile has rejected suggestions the single desks are used as trade barriers.
"The reality is that those that fall into that category in Australia don't have any of those trade-distorting elements to them," he said.
"But if I could just make one other point.

Cairns Group fears time running out for reform
The 18 member nations of the Cairns Group are concerned the window of opportunity is closing to secure a deal to reform world farm trade.
At the end of its three day summit in far north Queensland, the group has called on members of the World Trade Organisation to resume talks by no later than November.
The Cairns Group represents countries that rely heavily on agricultural exports, from Latin America to Asia, and include Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Canada.
For the last few days, the group has been trying to get the Doha round of trade talks back up and running.
The group's chairman, Australian Trade Minister Mark Vaile, says the level of ambition has not changed and no-one, not even the US, European Union (EU) or Japan, has hinted they might abort future discussions.
But the group is saying the major players need to be prepared to give more and expect less.

Japan looks to limit FTA proposal
A proposed free-trade deal between Australia and Japan is looking shaky, with agriculture again the most contentious issue.
Japanese Counsel-General Tsukasa Kawada has addressed a conference at Orange, in New South Wales, and made it clear attempts to remove trade protection for his country's agricultural sector will be a stumbling block.
"Japanese agriculture is quite sensitive," he said.
"The Australian side hopes that we start negotiations on every agricultural product.

Monopoly questioned amid AWB probe extension
The oil-for-food inquiry has been given another two months to deliver its final report.
Federal Attorney-General Phillip Ruddock has extended the inquiry into AWB's deals with Iraq until November 24.
As a result, the Western Australian Pastoralists and Graziers Association says the Federal Government should make changes to legislation now to allow other companies to export grain.
Spokesman Leon Bradley says the delay leaves growers, who are moving into harvest, feeling insecure about their wheat returns from AWB.
"It leaves growers in a very difficult position for the forthcoming harvest because we actually need legislative clarity because we deliver our grain," he said.

DNA tests used in cattle-duffing case
Police in Queensland have used DNA evidence to crack one of the state's biggest cattle-duffing cases in years.
A mother and son from a north Queensland grazing family have been convicted in the Mackay District Court for stock theft.
The Queensland Stock Squad used DNA from the tails of 276 cattle allegedly stolen from four north Queensland properties to trace the animals back to their original owners.
Squad spokesman Terry Hanly says although the testing cost $15,000, it was worth it.

Prices soar at organic wool sale
Prices have soared at Australia's first organic wool sale in Melbourne, with some fleeces fetching up to 50 cents a kilogram more than non-organic.
Three-hundred bales of wool from South Australia, New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland have been auctioned.
Elders spokesman Michael Blake says the difference in price was stark and more organic auctions are likely to be held down the track.
"We had two of the largest buyers in Australia bidding against each other to take these levels above the normal market for the type on the day," he said.
"The finer end of the wool went to 50 cents and higher above its equivalent.
"The middle microns, say 21, 21-and-a-half, it was a good 30 to 50 cents above the equivalent fleece types.

Flystrike plagues WA sheep
Western Australian sheep producers are battling a wave of flystrike as a result of rain over the past month.
With growing pasture, many sheep have been switched from hand-feeding to green grass and the change in diet is causing widespread diarrhoea and flystrike outbreaks.

Farmers taking on environmental reforms: survey
A new survey shows more farmers are changing their management styles to address environmental problems.
A survey by the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics of 1,700 broadacre and dairy farmers shows 80 were willing to accept lower profits in some years to help the environment.
Economist Andrew Hodges says the number of farmers involved in Landcare has also risen to 41 per cent since the last survey in 2001.
"Around 60 per cent of farmers reported that they had some kind of degradation issue on their farm," he said.
"Farmers, once they have identified that they've got a degradation issue, are responding really well to those problems.

Apple production 'set to double'
International consultants say Australia's apple industry is on track to double production in just six years.
Apple and Pear Australia has employed experts from New Zealand to oversee the project, called Future Orchards 2012.
New Zealand consultant Steve Spark has just finished touring Australia and says the aim of producing 45 tonnes per hectare is realistic.
"The next two years is just to get growers to realise they need to intensify and I think that has pretty much come to the fore now," he said.
"I would say, yes, they should be able to do it, if they're serious about orcharding.

US stint primes firefighters for summer
Fire crews are preparing for an early fire season, with several blazes flaring up around the country this week.
But 45 Australian and New Zealand firefighters are just returning from the frontline in the US, after spending the winter fighting fires during one of the worst North American fire seasons in decades.
Victorian firefighter Dennis Matthews says it has helped them to be ready for this summer.
"It's kept them in tune and switched them on earlier than they would have switched on," he said.

Community holds vigil for rain
The small community of Mono in Queensland's Burnett region is turning to prayer in an attempt to make it rain.
The district's main water storage, Cania Dam, is at just six per cent of capacity after years of drought.
Local pastor Estelle Hawkins is hoping that people from all walks of life will join the 24-hour prayer vigil.
"I think it is critical. I guess I hear a lot of people saying why haven't we had rain, and I thought, as I read the Bible, I see there, God says, 'Your prayers aren't being answered because you aren't asking'," she said.
"And I thought, 'Right, why shouldn't we put aside some time together?'"

MLA manager quits over hacking scandal
After almost a month-long investigation, a computer hacking scandal engulfing Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) has claimed its first and perhaps only scalp.
Late last month, it was revealed MLA staff members had hacked into an online poll on the National Livestock Identification System.
Today, the head of MLA's National Livestock Identification Unit, Christian Mulders, has resigned.
Even though MLA's media statement does not name him, the ABC has confirmed Mr Mulders has resigned.
It is unclear whether he was directly involved in the poll tampering or has taken the fall for others.
Disciplinary action has been taken against a number of other employees but MLA managing director David Palmer has refused to be interviewed.
Australian Beef Association head Linda Hewitt, who raised the alarm over the hacking scandal, remains deeply sceptical.

Dry weather prompts Ash Wednesday comparisons
The nation's peak fire agency is warning that the dry conditions are already as bad as those leading up to the devastating Ash Wednesday bushfires of 1983.
Fifty bushfires broke out across New South Wales over the weekend, ringing alarm bells for the Australasian Fire Authorities Council.
The Ash Wednesday fires in Victoria and South Australia were fuelled by hot winds after years of drought and killed more than 70 people.
The council's chief executive Len Foster says conditions are very similar this year.
"During August nationally we've had the warmest and hottest period on record," he said.
"Victoria had over 200 fires last week and New South Wales have 30 or 40 fires today.
"It's almost unheard of to have fires of that number and indeed that size in parts of Victoria as we're experiencing at the moment."

Vaile to concentrate on winning back Nationals' seats
Deputy Prime Minister Mark Vaile is defending the state of the Nationals after announcing a reshuffle to allow him to spend more time at home.
Mr Vaile will swap his Trade portfolio for Transport, with former agriculture minister Warren Truss to now represent Australia in international trade talks, including attempts to restart the Doha trade talks.
Mr Vaile says his job now is to concentrate on winning back seats and delivering improved infrastructure to rural Australia.
"What I'm doing is putting myself back on the ground in Australia on a permanent basis to ensure we have our best opportunity at the next election to increase our numbers," he said.

Push for inland rail network gathers speed
The push for an inland rail network between Melbourne and Brisbane has gathered pace at a meeting at Parkes in central western New South Wales.
One hundred and fifty delegates from New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria have pushed the Federal Government to decide on a route.
But the Government has given no financial commitment.
There is a mix of local government and private sector players discussing ways to make the rail route viable.
The delegates were addressed by the incoming Transport Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Mark Vaile.
Mr Vaile told the gathering very little freight is currently carried on rail.
He blamed the Sydney bottleneck and highlighted the need to develop an alternative system from Melbourne to Brisbane.
Mr Vaile did say it would take until 2019 to develop the inland rail route, even if planning started now.
He was however short on committing to Federal Government funding to the inland rail route between Melbourne and Brisbane.

Tobacco growers fear for industry
Victorian tobacco growers say their industry is on its deathbed, with their main buyer set to pull out at the end of 2008.
British American Tobacco will look to other countries for cheaper tobacco, offering its 138 Australian growers a $10 million compensation package.
John Muraca from the Tobacco Co-operative of Victoria says they have been told their crops are too expensive due to high labour costs.
"We've got to compete with the Third World countries of this world - your Thailands, your India, Brazil and Zimbabwe and look our wages," he said.

Farmers vent frustrations at rally
Hundreds of farmers are rallying in the north-west Victorian town of Mildura to air their frustrations at the state of the horticulture sector.
Tractors, utes, trucks and farm machinery are making their way down Mildura's main street.
Horticulturalists have a range of frustrations including a lack of export markets, battles with cheap imports and there is also concern about managed investment schemes.

Native vegetation regulations costing graziers
A new report says native vegetation regulations in Queensland are costing some graziers up to a million dollars each in lost development.
The Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) says the regulations have cost the rural sector about $520 million all up, with southern and western areas hardest hit.
ABARE's Lisa Elliston says graziers can not increase the carrying capacity of their properties and the findings suggest land clearing laws should be more flexible.
"What we mean by increased flexibility is the possibility of exploring for example things like tradeable development rights - that might require exploration of whether or not we can conserve or allow agricultural development to occur in one area if there's increased native vegetation conservation in another area," she said.

Sheep and cattle prices slump
Prices for sheep and cattle have crashed in South Australia after massive stock sell-offs last week.
Across many regions a lack of rain has seen pastures dry up forcing producers to sell off livestock early in the season.
More than 100,000 sheep, lambs and cattle went through the saleyards last week, forcing prices down.
Bruce Redpath from Southern Australian Livestock in Naracoorte has not seen prices so low in years.
"The biggest drop has been on cows I think, where we've seen cows fall in a week, a hundred to a $150," he said.

Drought behind yarding increase at Hay sale
The drought is prompting sheep producers in the New South Wales Riverina to send extra stock to the annual spring breeder sales.
The yarding for the Hay store merino sheep sale on Friday was up by 20 per cent to almost 55,000 head.
Graham Morphett from the Hay Merino Breeders Association says prices were well down on last year, but held up better than expected in such a dry season.
"The whole sale there was people ready to buy sheep, there was 500 people attended," he said.

Minister to lobby Govt to extend EC funding to Nullarbor pastoralists
