Former National party chief whip John Forrest says his decision not to support the Federal Government's controversial migration legislation is based on his personal experience of refugees' contribution to rural Australia.
Mr Forrest resigned from the position yesterday after abstaining from the vote on the plan to detain and process all asylum seekers offshore.
The Victorian-based member for Mallee says he has supported the visa cases of asylum seekers working in horticulture and local abattoirs and has visted others in detention.
"We have literally got thousands of refugees living amongst us, more particularly along the Murray Valley but they are spread right across the electorate," he said.
"When people meet these folks and listen to their story, their perception about them changes.

Biodiesel price cut unlikely
The country's biggest oil refiner says it will not be offering incentives for biodiesel to match its announcement to make ethanol cheaper at the pump.
Under a new program, Caltex and BP will offer ethanol-blended fuel at three cents per litre less than regular unleaded fuel.
Caltex government affairs manager Frank Topham says biodiesel is too expensive to cut prices for motorists.
"Biodiesel is significantly more expensive than ethanol for us to purchase, for the producers to produce and therefore a three cents a litre discount will not be possible," he said.
Caltex has also rejected claims that it is not buying fuel from the county's biggest biofuels producer.

Govt lawyers seek access to secret AWB documents
Lawyers for the Federal Government are fighting for access to a handful of secret AWB documents which it claims involve possible fraud.
In submissions today, counsel for the Commonwealth, Ian Harrison SC, told Justice Neil Young in the Federal Court, the selected material must be released to the Cole inquiry, even if it is privileged because it indicates evidence of possible fraud.
Mr Harrison said AWB inflated its wheat price to pay Tigris $8 million, with part of this money being used to pay $2 million in compensation to Iraq for iron filings contamination in wheat shipments.
Mr Harrison said this was a clear breach of UN sanctions and fraudulent.

Third party to oversee NLIS audit
The Federal Government will appoint an independent third party to oversee an audit of the National Livestock Identification System database to address cattle producer concerns once and for all.
The Australian Beef Association lobby group feared the audit would be conducted in-house,and not effectively address its claims that the electronic livestock tagging system is not working effectively.
But Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran has released the terms of reference for the 10 week audit and says he is just about to appoint a major accounting firm to run it.
He says every major group will have a say.
"The Australian Beef Association will be contacted and their concerns will be completely and fully explored," he said.

Wool growers urged to keep research levy
Wool producers are being urged not to lodge a protest vote against maintaining the 2 per cent levy which funds research, development and marketing by Australian Wool Innovation (AWI).
With plans afoot to merge AWI with Australian Wool Services (AWS), some growers are worried their funds will be used to pay a $27 million debt owed by AWS in the United Kingdom.
Chairman of WoolPoll 2006 John Keniry understands growers are hurting from the drought and low wool prices, but says cutting the levy will create new problems.
"Zero per cent means that there is no levy income," he said.
"If there is no levy income from growers then there is also no contribution from the Federal Government and that means there is no ongoing income for AWI.
"AWI would spend the reserves it has simply to finish off the contracts that are currently in place and then turn out the light, which, from my personal view as a wool grower, would be a sad event if we just walked away from research altogether."
The WoolPoll vote closes on November 3.
The wool market remained steady this week, the eastern market indicator up just one cent to 742 cents per kilogram.
The market remained unchanged in the west.

New regulations restrict animal health work to vets
Under proposed new animal welfare regulations in New South Wales, a range of routine animal health procedures will be restricted to vets.
From September 1, vets will be responsible for dehorning cattle, and mulesing sheep over a year old, and castrating cattle, sheep and goats over six months of age.
The new regulations also classify most equine dentistry as veterinary science, limiting equine dentists to basic teeth cleaning and rasping.
Master equine dentist and trainer Ian Wharton says the regulations will be devastating.

Sunbeam won't renew currant contracts
Australia's largest dried fruit processor says it will not renew or issue new contracts for currants.
Murray Valley growers have received falling returns for the past six years, raising questions about the industry's viability.
Under existing contracts Sunbeam Foods will still have to accept 3,500 tonnes of fruit this year, but spokesman Chris Ellis says the global market is oversupplied and it is hard for Australia to compete.
"I think we were hopeful that the Greek crop might be diminished this year or that some sort of political trading resolution would have come and the situation would have eased," he said.
"For those growers impacted they've got to find another opportunity.

Wine expert predicts grape glut's end
A leading wine authority says Australia's grape glut will soon be over and it is nothing to worry about.
Author of the Wine Atlas of Australia James Halliday says boom and bust cycles are a normal part of agriculture.
He says like sugar, wine will revive.
He has played down the fact that up to 100,000 tonnes of grapes were left unpicked in the last Australian harvest.
"That's still only 5 per cent of the total potential harvest, so it's by no means as dramatic as the headlines would have you believe," he said.

Aust firefighters help battle US blazes
A team of 47 Australian and New Zealand firefighters have flown to the United States to help battle some of the worst summer wildfires in more than a decade.
The crew is on a four-week deployment in the western part of the US, where more than 40 fires are burning.
Jeff Pike from Victoria's Department of Sustainability and Environment says Australian firefighters will have to work in unfamiliar conditions.
"Most of their fuel is soft wood fuel systems, pine spruces and fuel like that," he said.
"The elevations they operate at are a little higher than here.

Qld's finest cattle on show at Ekka
The who's who of Queensland's cattle industry is at one place today - at the Brisbane Ekka.
The Ekka is playing host to one of the nation's most prestigious cattle competitions.
The cattle are bringing good prices at today's auction.
Numbers are down a little at the Ekka prime cattle competition this year, numbers of cattle that is, but there are certainly plenty of people.
Between 200-300 have gathered around to hear how much Queensland's meat processors are prepared to pay for the cream of Queensland's fat cattle.
Already the grand champion pen of six limousin, exhibited by Eddie Nolan from southern Queensland, has made 250 cents per kilogram liveweight.
Grand champion steer of the show, another limousin, made 305 cents a kilo.

Noxious weed found to benefit salmon
A Tasmanian scientific researcher is turning one of Australia's most noxious weeds into beneficial omega-3 oils.
Matthew Miller has found that feeding pattersons curse, or salvation jane, to salmon significantly increases their levels of the healthy oils.
Mr Miller began using oil extracted from the weed as fish food after identifying the particular compounds needed to stimulate omega-3 production.
"Patterson's curse have this really unique special oil and pattersons curse has the highest level of this oil," he said.

Snowy River to reap benefits of western water project
A big water-saving project is being officially opened in western New South Wales today, with benefits for the iconic Snowy River.
The $28 million redevelopment of the Barren Box Swamp near Griffith will save 20 gigalites of water.
It is one of the biggest projects funded under the New South Wales, Victorian and Federal Governments program to boost flows in the Snowy.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation chairman Dick Thompson says a natural wetland on the site is also being restored.
"We've already seen a lot of the bird life return," he said.

Rural youth forced to travel for abortions
A new study has found teenagers in country Australia are travelling up to 100 kilometres to have abortions in the cities, because of a lack of services.
The report has been published today in the Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health.
Co-author Carolyn Nickson, from the University of Melbourne, says almost one in five teenagers are leaving their regional towns to access termination services.
"Eighteen per cent of teenagers had travelled over 100 kilometres, 28 women in our sample had travelled from interstate," she said.
"Twenty of those were from New South Wales and 10 of those were from the Albury region.

Cowra Abattoir in receivership
The abattoir at the centre of a row over the Federal Government's new industrial relations laws has been placed into receivership.
Two hundred workers were locked out of the Cowra Abattoir in New South Wales this morning, and meat supplies to local butcher shops were suspended.
The plant hit the headlines earlier this year when management sacked 29 workers under the IR laws, and offered to rehire them on different conditions.
Charlie Donzo, from the Meat Employees Union, says a new workplace agreement had been developed, and he is surprised and disappointed.
"This is absolutely devastating, not only for myself but for the workers at Cowra," he said.
"Given the problems we have had over the last three or four months, and the efforts that the fellows have put into putting in a new agreement in place to make the plant more efficient and that.

Shipment fodder blamed for livestock deaths
The use of new fodder on four live sheep shipments last year is being blamed for a slight rise in livestock death rates.
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) and Livecorp figures show small increases in mortality rates for sheep and cattle during 2005, and a slight fall in goat deaths.
Out of 4.2 million sheep exported last year, 0.95 per cent died.
MLA general manager Mike Hayward says that was largely due to the fodder, which was less dusty but contained less fibre and nutrients.
"It essentially led to an increase in mortalities because a more than normal number of the sheep failed to eat," he said.
"There was a higher level of disease in the animals as a result of that lack of fibre.
"It was as simple as that."

Single desk changes 'would hit AWB shares'
Investment banker JP Morgan says shares in wheat exporter AWB could drop to $2.80, if the company loses control of the single desk for wheat exports.
Shares fell last week to $3.36, which is lower than the company's debut price on the Australian Stock Exchange.
An analysis by the banker also shows that AWB's share value would hover around $4 a share if it held onto the single desk but more competitors were allowed to sell wheat overseas.
Greg Canavan, a senior equities analyst from Fat Prophets, says that is not surprising given AWB's experience in wheat sales.
"When you look at the whole structure of the market AWB, given its monopoly position, does have a very big market share," he said.
"If it didn't have to give that market share up then it would still be in competition with the other players coming in.

US wheat forecast continues to drop
The US wheat production forecast continues to slide but there has been a sharp rise in grain prices.
The latest US Agriculture Department wheat estimate is off another 5 million bushels from last month at 1.8 billion.
But that is just a small decline compared with the 14 per cent drop so far from the last marketing year.
USDA's World Agricultural Outlook Board chairman Gerald Bange says the bigger story is a 20 cent price increase on tightening competitor production in Argentina, Canada and the EU.
"EU-25, in particular, was down pretty sharply," he said.
"We can down 6.8 million tons on our estimate of their 06/07 crop and the reason for that is they were hit really hard by some real extreme heat in June and July."

Farmers fear further chemical bans
Farmers are worried the Federal Government will ban access to more chemicals commonly used in agriculture, in response to last week's terrorism arrests in the United Kingdom.
Some say restrictions on the ammonium nitrate fertiliser have made the chemical prohibitively expensive.
The Victorian Farmers Federation says the future of another 84 fertilisers, herbicides and fumigants is being considered by the Government.
Spokesman Geoff Kendall says because farmers already have to obtain training certificates for many of the chemicals, the Government should not over-react.
"We understand it will be the farmers won't have access to these products," he said.
"Basically they'll be banned from using them in the future so we're very very concerned.

World Bank urges seasonal work visas for islanders
The World Bank has backed farmers' calls for unskilled Pacific Island workers to fill labour shortages in Australia.
The Federal Government has previously rejected any changes to the visa scheme which allows skilled migrants into the country
But the bank says the Government could introduce a pilot program, allowing islanders to spend part of the year working in seasonal labour jobs.
Senior economist Manjula Luthria says the the islanders need the work or some Pacific economies could collapse.
"Forty per cent of the population are youth and in less than 10 years from now, they're going to want to be making the transition from working basically off the land to paid employment," he said.
"A small percentage are actually going to find it domestically.

Supply increase slashes macadamia prices
An increased world supply has cut the price of macadamia nuts by almost half and investors are counting the cost.
Up to 20 per cent of macadamia farms have changed hands in the past two years, due to strong demand and sustained industry growth.
But Andrew Heap, from the Australian Macadamia Society, says increasing fuel costs and mortgage repayments has now hit consumer demand.
He says over-investment on some farms will create problems.
"Most of those investors have been in a financial position to pay more than the agricultural value say these farms are worth," he said.

Cattle TB surveillance program nears end
After more than 30 years, the tuberculosis surveillance program for cattle will wrap up at the end of this year.
The nation-wide program has been monitoring the health of cattle in northern Australia since 1970.
The chief veterinary officer in the Northern Territory, Brian Radunz, says it is seven years since tuberculosis was detected there, and he is 99.9 per cent certain it has been wiped out.
"Due to the nature of TB you can always have a infection hidden out there but it's very unlikely given the fact that for the last 10 or so years if we have found infection we have been removing all the animals that have been exposed to that infected animal," he aid.
"So unless there's some undetected infection around we should never detect it.

Logging detrimental to possums' sex life: study
The results of a five-year study claims farming and logging is having an impact on the sex life of possums.
The mountain brush tail possum of north-eastern Victoria has been in the spotlight, and found to only have one mate in areas which have been cleared.
Professor Jenny Martin, from the University of Melbourne, says monogamy is rare in mammals, and it is occurring because there are fewer trees for sleeping and eating.
"But at the other site where there was heaps and heaps of large trees with hollows, huge amounts of food trees and most importantly that those two types of trees were very close to one another, females could have extremely small home ranges while still getting access to the same amount of resources in terms of food and shelter," she said.

Rain cheers Louth race goers
Recent rain was a reason to celebrate at the 48th annual Louth races in western New South Wales over the weekend.
After almost a decade of drought, the red dust has been replaced by a blanket of green.
About 4,000 people flocked into Louth and committee president Tess Le Leviere says the rain made a difference.
"People started working about two months ago on the different jobs and they get together at the pub and talk about it and by the time it is the day there's been a lot of excitement and people forget just for a little while their problems," she said.
"We've been very lucky because we've have three inches - nearly four - of rain over the last six weeks and everything's very green.

First independent sugar shipment leaves Cairns
The first shipment of sugar from two Queensland mills operating outside the industry's single desk has left Cairns bound for China.
Queensland Sugar Limited's monopoly on export sales has ended under deregulation, with the Mossman and Mulgrave mills deciding to join the trade.
Worker Barry Donnelly was at the Cairns sugar terminal to watch the 24,000 tonnes of sugar being loaded.
"This will take about 17 hours to load this ship - there are five holds on this ship and they will just about be filled to capacity," he said.

Australian judge makes mark on English show
An Australian cattle breeder has made his mark in England, after being invited to judge at the prestigious Great Yorkshire Show.
Rod Summers, who owns Maranga Stud at Evandale in Tasmania, was the mandatory independent judge of the belted galloway breed.
In true Australian style he managed to ruffle a few feathers before proving he knows his stuff about the British breed.
"A lady took me to task [about] why she was placed fourth instead of third after I swapped them, before I ordered the ribbons," he said.
"Anyway, then she explained to me how the beast I'd placed third she'd sold last year and the beast I'd placed fourth was the one she'd kept.

Demand fuels lobster breeding research
Australian marine scientists are trying to farm tropical lobsters, in a bid to meet the insatiable appetite of the Chinese.
China is prepared to pay $30 a kilogram and demand cannot be met from wild stocks.
Mike Hall, from the Australian Institute of Marine Science, says the biggest challenge to farming lobster is overcoming the disease problems which kill young larvae.
"If we can get these animals from eggs through the larval phase and through the grow out phase to harvesting in a very short time, or in a short time, you're going to have a higher profit margin than one that takes extremely long," he said.

Cannery wins US export deal
Australia's last tuna cannery has secured a $40 million export deal with the United States.

Growers urged to aid canker-hit farms
Australian Citrus Growers wants members to donate money to help colleagues in central Queensland affected by the canker outbreak.
More than half-a-million trees were destroyed following the detection of the disease near Emerald in July 2004.
The Queensland and Federal governments are footing 80 per cent of the bill but industry needs to contribute about $200,000.
President Mark Chown is hoping other regions will help out.
"People can contribute as much as they wish," he said.
"We understand times are very tough for all growers at the moment, however, these people have had their entire orchards removed.
"Looking out the back door there's nothing, so we're very concerned about that and this project was put forward and we've been eager to be involved."
And as the winter citrus season wraps up in the Riverland and Sunraysia, fruit exports to China are looking shaky.
Growers have gained official access to the country but they are worried about a tough quarantine protocol to keep the pest, fuller's rose weevil, out of China.
The Federal Government has rejected calls to underwrite the initial fruit shipment.
But Andrew Green, from SA's Citrus Industry Development Board, has not given up hope.

WA pushes for federal drought relief funds
The West Australian Government will apply for exceptional circumstances (EC) relief for some of the state's worst drought-affected regions.
It is in negotiations with the Federal Government to roll over an existing EC claim in the northern agricultural region but extend it further into the central wheatbelt.
Dexter Davies, from the Dry Season Advisory Committee, says parts of the state are the worst he has seen anywhere in Australia.
"It's the driest start in history," he said.
"In the northern areas ... all chances are gone.
"Mullewa, Morowa, through there, it simply hasn't rained and that goes right out to the coast to Northampton - up there they just simply haven't had a winter at all.

Farmers welcome migration Bill's collapse
Farmers are among those who have welcomed the Federal Government's decision to abandon its proposal to detain and assess all asylum seekers offshore.
Prime Minister John Howard has withdrawn the legislation because the Government did not have the numbers to get it through the senate.
Ian Skiller says 90 per cent of the asylum seekers he employs on his farms at Tooleybuc, in north-west Victoria, are farmers who lost their own properties in the Afghan war.
"The thing that annoys me is that they have knowledge of horticulture and farming and it seems a waste that we're not utilising those skills," he said.
"I think they're an asset to the area.

Govt to hear farmers' chemical access concerns
The Federal Government says it will listen to farmer concerns before deciding whether to restrict access to more agricultural chemicals in the wake of the latest terrorism threat.
There is currently a review of 84 herbicides, fungicides and fumigants.
Farmers are worried that a new licensing system being considered by the Government will make the chemicals too expensive.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says there needs to be a balance between security concerns and farming needs.
Ben Fargher, from the National Farmers Federation, is hopeful the Government can be persuaded to keep existing training and certification programs instead.
"We will sit down with government, we will explain how the current schemes work with government," he said.
"There is government involvement in this and government people I have spoken to are aware of the industry schemes.

BJD trace proves NLIS's worth: vet
The Queensland Government has rejected criticism of the National Livestock Identification System (NLIS), after using it for the first time to track six potentially diseased cattle across three states.
The system, which aims to achieve whole-of-life traceability, has been accused of being inaccurate and costly, and is now subject to an independent audit.
But Queensland's principal veterinary officer, Dr Rick Webster, says the system has been used to trace cattle from a herd diagnosed with Bovine Johnes disease (BJD), avoiding a costly eradication program.
"Because of NLIS we were able to check the records and see that all six animals had all been slaughtered and they had only spent time alive in feedlots," he said.

Middle East unrest hits cattle exports
The conflict in the Middle East is affecting some sectors of the live export cattle trade.
Israel is a consistent buyer of large bulls from the Kimberley in far north Western Australia.
But over the past month, inquiries have eased and prices have dropped 20 to 30 cents a kilogram.
Elders livestock agent Kelvin Hansey says the instability between Israel and Lebanon has hurt the small bull market.
"I mean it's a 30 per cent drop in the price already, and has the potential though to stop for several months," he said.
"They are big events, these international events.

Abattoir's closure hits lamb prices
Livestock prices in New South Wales have reacted to the closure of the Cowra Abattoir, with lamb prices falling $3 to $4 a head.
An administrator was appointed and the abattoir's operations were shut down yesterday.
Management claims the meatworks had been losing between $30,000 and $50,000 a week.
Chris Grove, from the New South Wales Sheep Meats Council, is concerned that there is one less buyer in the market.
"What it will probably mean will be a downturn in competition," he said.
"One less buyer means less competition but it is just to be hoped that there is enough competition in the market.
"A big problem we are facing in the industry, all the meat industry and the sheep industry, is the reduction in kill capacity.
"Of course this has been made worse by closure of Cowra Abattoir.

Cattle feedlot to host ethanol plant
International investment firm Babcock and Brown is planning to build a $120 million ethanol plant at a cattle feedlot in southern New South Wales.
The proposed facility at Rockdale Beef at Yanco will produce up to 150 million litres of ethanol a year, and the grain by-product fed to the cattle.
Rockdale's general manager Paul Trojah says the ethanol production will complement the feedlot's plans for a biogas plant to generate electricity from cow manure.
"Rockdale Feedlock will be producing about five megawatts of energy a day from all of the waste streams," he said.

Farmers question fuel package benefits
The Federal Government has pumped $1.5 billion into a plan to tackle high fuel prices, but there are questions over whether the farm or transport sectors will benefit.
Almost half of the package will cover the cost of converting and installing LPG tanks.
Grants of up to $2,000 for the conversion are available immediately.
But it is not expected to benefit farmers because it only applies to private users, and most farmers use machinery run on diesel, which cannot be converted to LPG.
There are also concerns conversions will be delayed because of a huge demand and limited resources.
A three-year program to help service stations adopt equipment to sell ethanol-blended fuel, has also been announced.
But the biofuels industry would have preferred a mandate for ethanol-blended fuel and more pressure on oil companies to buy ethanol.
The Federal Government will also spend $123 million to encourage people to use wind and solar power over generators in remote communities.
There is $76 million to encourage more oil exploration.

Fishing industry
The fishing industry says the fuel package is of no assistance.
Neil Green, from the Queensland Seafood Industry Association, says primary producers have been hoping for excise cuts to reduce fuel costs.
"I don't think politicians, in particular the Prime Minister, actually realises where the fishing industry is," he said.
"Financially we're on a knife's edge and fuel is our big cost.

Fines for minor breaches may exacerbate driver shortage problem
Livestock transport operators are concerned that new fatigue management measures proposed by the National Transport Commission could force drivers out of the industry.
The commission's proposal to improve driver fatigue suggests a demerit system for log book offences, the same system used for general traffic offences.
Ross Fraser from Frasers Transport in Queensland says while road safety is paramount, the shortage of drivers will get worse if they start being fined for minor breaches.
"We're really concerned about it because we're getting drivers who are at the moment being fined for 15 minutes over in their log book - 15 minutes over a driving period that may have happened three weeks ago," he said.

ACCC recommendations threaten phone rental parity
The cost of phone line rentals in regional Australia could rise dramatically if the Federal Government accepts new recommendations from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC).
Telecommunications consultant Gavin Priestley says the ACCC has recommended a wholesale line rental of $7.00 a month for CBD customers, but $34 for major regional centres.
He says that means rental costs for lines in smaller communities could rise much higher.
"What it signals is the average of the access prices for telephones right across Australia is going to change and our worst fears potentially are going to be realised," he said.
"That is country people will not get parity and will pay more for access to their phone line.
"When the sale of Telstra was touted we were guaranteed that we would get parity of price and future proofing of the service. This is certainly not parity."
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says it is concerned and seeking more detail from the Communications Minister.

US grain growers anxious to control ethanol plants
Australian investment in US ethanol plants is causing a stir among US grain growers, who are anxious to hold onto control of their new industry.
Mid-west US producers said at a farm bill listening session they are concerned foreign investors that Wall Street might gain too much control of US ethanol production.
National Farmers Union president Tom Buis says "it's been a 30-year struggle, basically by farmers to get this industry kick-started. And now that it's arrived, they just don't want to sit back and watch the control and all the profits go elsewhere".

Sugar prices drop
World sugar prices have fallen below 13 US cents a pound, down from a high of more than 18 cents earlier this year.
It is bad news for Australian growers, who are about halfway through the harvest and had been hoping for a breakthrough season.

Labor claims underdog status in Qld election
Water and health are expected to dominate the Queensland state election, set for September 9.
It is 65 years since a Labor government won a fourth term in office in Queensland.
But despite holding 60 of the 89 seats in State Parliament the party is claiming underdog status, in part because its lost the last three by-elections and at least 10 sitting members, including a number of ministers, are not contesting this poll.
The Liberal Party has a new and untested leader who has been in the job for less than a week and the Coalition needs to win 22 seats to take office.
The key issues are the water crisis in the south-east and the stressed health system statewide.
The Premier says his plans for a south-east water grid and a $9 billion injection into health over the coming years will solve the problems.

Farmers urged to lobby for weed bio-control programs
Scientists are calling on farmers to lobby for more natural ways to control weeds.
The Co-operative Research Centre for Weed Management says the use of bugs and diseases to control invasive plants over the past 100 years has provided $10 billion worth of environmental and agricultural protection.
Despite criticism that natural control methods are too slow and unreliable, Dr Rachel McFadyen says the new research suggests previous efforts have prevented invasive plants from wrecking the environment.
"What we're saying to farmers is if farmers have got a significant problem year after year then they should be asking their agriculture representatives and their state government members, is there a bio-control program against this weed?" she said.
"And if there is, does it have enough funding to get it going and if there isn't why is there one?
"Because it's one of the best returns on money that they can get."
Meanwhile large tree cropping companies in Western Australia are opening their gates to agist sheep from drought-stricken farms.
Integrated Tree Cropping has 70 plantations in the state's south-west and wants to use sheep to control weeds.
Spokesman Andy Wright says it should help the company too by saving thousands of dollars a year on pesticides.
"We would have to carry out management on those weeds," he said.
"We'd have to spray the weeds within the plantation or we would have to slash round the outside of the plantation.

Wool bodies launch national mulesing assurance program
The wool industry's peak bodies have launched a national mulesing assurance program to try to reassure wool processors that animals are being treated humanely.
Australian Wool Innovation and Wool Producers will improve training for 1,200 mulesing contractors by the end of the year to minimise pain and suffering for animals.
Under the practice of mulesing, skin is cut from the backside of lambs to reduce the risk of flystrike.
Secretary of the program, Charlie De Fegely says the wool industry wants to show it has ethical standards.
"I've even heard of some contractors paying for their producers to do it simply because they want to have best practice and they don't want to be part of holding the industry back," he said.

Wool growers want to postpone wool levy vote
The Australian Wool Growers Association will ask the Federal Government to delay an industry vote on the future of the wool levy.
This year's Woolpoll is asking growers to support an ongoing 2 per cent levy to fund research, development and marketing by Australian Wool Innovation (AWI).
But with AWI planning a merger with Australian Wool Services, the association's Martin Oppenheimer says growers need more information about the new organisation before they can make a decision.
"At the moment in the current climate there's no way that wool growers are going to be able to afford extra levies," he said.
"What they want to be able to do is to split their levies between research and marketing.

Green light given to third poppy processor
A third poppy processor has been given the green light by the Tasmanian Government.
TPI Enterprises has been permitted to manufacture and sell narcotics from a small trial plot, but managing director Jarrod Ritchie says it is a significant step.
He is hoping to lock in future orders, despite a world oversupply of poppy-derived products.
"There is price pressure on morphine, I don't think anyone's denying that," he said.
"Countries like Turkey are sitting on significant stockholds but we see our main focus as being thebaine and we're very confident of getting those markets.

Mystery virus wipes out flying foxes
The skies around the Northern Territory town of Katherine have been clearer over the past 10 months, due to a mystery virus that is wiping out large numbers of native 'little red' flying foxes.
While the mammal is considered a pest to farmers and townsfolk, the scientific community is concerned the ecological system will suffer from a 50 per cent reduction in flying fox numbers.
Andrew Pickering from Northern Territory Parks and Wildlife says no one knows what impact the fall in numbers will have.
"There's possibly a roundworm and a virus, not knowing exactly what to pinpoint," he said.
"Flying foxes are actually a huge ecological benefit to the bush around here as pollinaters and seed distributors and so the loss of those big mega colonies that we typically have they can number up to hundreds of thousands have disappeared at least from the Katherine region."
Meanwhile for the first time all efforts to manage the fruit fly are being recorded in a national stocktake.
It is looking at surveillance, research and development, market access and trade, and quarantine inspections.

Farmers hail success of tuna trial program
Tuna farmers are hailing the success of a trial program to catch fish all year round.
To test growth and health levels, 65 tuna have been held in cages off Port Lincoln in South Australia for the past 17 months which is four times longer than usual.
The fish were harvested yesterday and David Ellis from the Tuna Boat Owners Association says they were in excellent health.
"We're going to get the weight and the length of the fish, to see
how much they've grown," he said.
"We've also taken product quality samples or flesh samples so we're looking at how long or how red it stays for in shelf life.

ACCC recommendations threaten phone rental parity
The cost of phone line rentals in regional Australia could rise dramatically if the Federal Government accepts new recommendations from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC).
Telecommunications consultant Gavin Priestley says the ACCC has recommended a wholesale line rental of $7.00 a month for CBD customers, but $34 for major regional centres.
He says that means rental costs for lines in smaller communities could rise much higher.
"What it signals is the average of the access prices for telephones right across Australia is going to change and our worst fears potentially are going to be realised," he said.
"That is country people will not get parity and will pay more for access to their phone line.
"When the sale of Telstra was touted we were guaranteed that we would get parity of price and future proofing of the service. This is certainly not parity."
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says it is concerned and seeking more detail from the Communications Minister.
But chief executive Ben Fargher says he is confident rural line rentals will remain capped, under what is says is an "iron clad" deal between the NFF and the Government.

ACCC recommendations threaten phone rental parity
The cost of phone line rentals in regional Australia could rise dramatically if the Federal Government accepts new recommendations from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC).
Telecommunications consultant Gavin Priestley says the ACCC has recommended a wholesale line rental of $7.00 a month for CBD customers, but $34 for major regional centres.
He says that means rental costs for lines in smaller communities could rise much higher.
"What it signals is the average of the access prices for telephones right across Australia is going to change and our worst fears potentially are going to be realised," he said.
"That is country people will not get parity and will pay more for access to their phone line.
"When the sale of Telstra was touted we were guaranteed that we would get parity of price and future proofing of the service. This is certainly not parity."
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says it is concerned and seeking more detail from the Communications Minister.
But chief executive Ben Fargher says he is confident rural line rentals will remain capped, under what is says is an "iron clad" deal between the NFF and the Government.
The new national agreement to handle exotic pest and disease outbreaks is being questioned, after a decision to withdraw financial support for Queensland's attempts to control sugar cane smut.
The fungal disease, sugar cane smut, was first discovered in south-east Queensland just over two months ago and since then more than 50 properties have been put under quarantine, disrupting harvest and putting strict protocols on local growers.
As a signatory to the new Emergency Plant Pest Response Deed under Plant Health Australia, canegrowers were anticipating federal and state governments would pay 80 per cent of the $43 million emergency response plan.
But the National Management Group (NMG) voted against the proposal, suggesting the disease could not be eradicated or contained.
Isis Canegrowers chairman Joe Russo says the decision has shocked the cane growing community.
"It's no different from when you're told you first had smut, you're somewhat quite gutted to hear the response to what NMG have come down with," he said.

Polybag price increase hurts producers
The price of the woven polybags used to package seed, wool and fertiliser is set to rise due to soaring crude oil prices.
The bags are made from a petroleum-based resin, which has increased in price and is becoming harder to source from Asia.
Bob Adams, from Colquhouns Fremantle Bag company says producers can no longer absorb the cost, and are now looking at other options.
"We've seen costs rise by as much as 30 to 35 per cent over the last eight to nine months to the point it's slowly being passed onto the packers and the users of the bags," he said.

Financial lifeline saves Broken Hill YMCA
The Broken Hill YMCA will open within three months after being thrown a last minute lifeline.
The building was going on the market because it was $50,000 short of funds but it has been given that amount by its governing body.
A team of YMCA Australia staff will be in the city next week to meet with the board and develop a business plan and a long term management strategy.
New staff will be recruited and president Dionne Devlin says it still needs the ongoing support of the local community.
"We start straight away looking at the capital works that need to be done down there and organising the people that want to help and getting straight in and getting things done," she said.

Rio Tinto plans Perth tyre retreading facility
More evidence of the impact of the resources boom has surfaced today as miners see a worldwide shortage driving the price of mining tyres up to $100,000 each.
The huge cost has prompted Rio Tinto to invest in its own tyre retreading facility in Perth, which will open later this year.
Kevin McLeish, from the Rio-owned Argyle Diamonds, says the lengths they have had to go to shows the magnitude of the problem.
"So here you have have a mining company getting into the tyre business, to be able to keep itself open," he said.

Future growth in agriculture depends on exports: ABARE
The Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) says most of the future growth in Australian agriculture will depend on exports.
The peak commodity forecaster has released a report showing agriculture's contribution to gross domestic product (GDP) has fallen from around 3.6 per cent in the early 1980s to 2.7 per cent in the years leading up to 2005.
That is mainly due to the growth in the services, mining and manufacturing sectors.
ABARE spokeswoman Lisa Elliston says while agriculture continues to expand, it needs to focus on international markets because the domestic market is so small.
"In particular that means that we have to focus on things like barriers to trade, so that we have tariffs and import quotas that continue to be an important issue," she said.

Authorities mull beef exports with Korea
Two of Australia's biggest beef exporters are meeting with Korean importers on the Gold Coast this week, to discuss ways Australia can sell more beef to the country.
Korea is Australia's third-largest beef market, taking more than 100,000 tonnes last year, but US exports are set to resume after a two-year ban related to mad cow disease.
Meat and Livestock Australia regional manager for Korea, Glen Feist, says Korean supermarkets want more Australian beef and positive news is expected as early as tomorrow.
"For the first time we've actually got two of Australia's major exporters, two of Korea's major importers and Tesco, which is the number two retailer up there with 44 hypermarkets, getting into a room for three days together," he said.

Tas apple producers seek new Japanese export protocol
Tasmanian apple growers are pinning their hopes on a new export protocol to save their export market to Japan.
The industry has spent eight years pioneering the trade, but despite years of research, the fumigation of fruit for codling moth has continued to cause significant internal fruit damage.
Fruit exporter Ken Bell says the industry is not likely to resume the trade until a new protocol can be agreed to.
"Generally, the industry feel a little bit despondent with the Japanese market because we've worked for years and years and it's cost a lot of money as you say, a lot of heartache,"he said.

Call for community projects for work-for-the-dole participants
Community projects are being sought for work-for-the-dole programs in Broken Hill, Menindee and Wilcannia.
Sureway Employment chief executive officer, Judy Galloway, says two projects are already under way in Broken Hill but more are needed.
She says the projects are for not for profit organisations and provide an opportunity for people to gain skills that could lead to part time or full time employment.
Mrs Galloway says participants can not take the place of paid employees.
"So it has to be additional work which is something of a community benefit," she said.

NSW irrigators consider class action over lost groundwater entitlements
Irrigators in New South Wales are considering legal action despite the Federal Government signing off on a $110 million package to compensate them for a loss of groundwater entitlements.
The package relates to major cuts in bore water allocations in six river valleys, but the irrigators say the financial assistance is far too little, too late.
Dennis Moxey from the Lachlan Groundwater Working Group says he understands their concerns, but doubts a class action would succeed.
"It's making some people fairly irate about the whole process now and I'm not sure we are going to be able to hold the irrigators to a negotiation process. They're going to start taking their own actions," he said.

Senate told Govt to blame for 'environmental disaster' in Culgoa
A Senate inquiry into water has been told that successive Queensland governments have ignored the advice of expert scientists, to create what is possibly the 'worst environmental disaster in inland Australia' on the Culgoa Balonne floodplain in northern New South Wales.
NSW farmer Ed Fessey told the Senate's Rural and Regional Affairs Committee that over extraction of water in Queensland is destroying both the environment and the livelihoods of those on the Culgoa floodplain.
"This is highlighted by the flippant, nonchalant and at times dismissive attitude that successive Queensland Natural Resources to due process; the complete ignorance of a very strong and detailed submission by the New South Wales Government in 2004; the very select use of Peter Cullen's scientific report to endorse their plan, whilst ignoring the clear warnings that significant ecological problems will occur," he said.

Grim outlook for SA grain harvest
A warm and windy day in South Australia yesterday has not helped what was looking set to be a decent season for grain growers.
The grain harvest will now be well below average this year, unless there is significant rain in the next two weeks.
Peter Fulwood from Rural Solutions South Australia says the state is headed for its driest winter on record.
"If we don't get substantial rain in the next couple of weeks, we could be looking at one of, if not the driest, winters on record and then we go into our spring weather where temperatures can rapidly rise in those months and we can get drying winds, crops can come under extreme moisture stress," he said.
"Overall, the state crop certainly won't be anything above average unless we were to get a complete change in the weather. The estimates we would be looking at would be below average."
Unusual weather patterns in Australia and overseas are putting new pressure on global grain prices.
Dry weather in Western Australia means grain handler CBH will not be exporting lupins this year, to ensure stock feed supplies into 2007.

Farmers urged to assess greenhouse gas emissions
Farmers are being warned to start assessing their carbon emissions, even though a new state-based carbon trading scheme does not include agriculture yet.
States including Victoria and New South Wales have launched a plan to establish emission targets and a trading scheme for electricity generators.
Tracie Griffin from the Victorian Government's Greenhouse in Agriculture Program says farmers are the second highest greenhouse gas polluters.

Claim Mustard seed could supply biodiesel industry
The mustard seed could be the next oilseed to supply the growing biodiesel industry.
In South Australiam trials of the crop will be expanded, because it fares better in low rainfall regions that cannot support other oilseed crops like canola.
Trent Potter from the South Australian Research and Development Institute is hopeful more farmers will soon be able to produce oilseed crops for the biodiesel industry.

Women's contribution to rural business in spotlight
It is Regional Women in Business Week, and its founder says it is an important chance for country women to promote themselves.
Queensland author Jo Eady says businesswomen in rural and regional areas have a significant impact on local employment and incomes, and says it is no wonder the week has taken off around the country.
"There's retail, there's industrial, there's manufacturing, there's agriculture, and then there's the miriad of service industries which takes in you know your marketing and your promotion and your computer type activities or your technology type activities and we're there," she said.

Submissions sought on chemical spray drift
The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority is calling for submissions on its plan to reduce chemical spray drift on farms.
Producers, insurance companies and other farm industry representatives had their say on the proposals at a forum in Canberra yesterday.
The authority's David Loschke says the plan includes national regulations for labelling and handling pesticides.
"There's a range of approaches on existing labels, quite a bit of variability and that's something we want to change," he said.
"We want to bring them all into a much more uniform sort of approach and an approach that the states with their powers of enforcement can use effectively to control their uses."
Submissions are due on October 6. 

Scientists map DNA sequence for bovine animals
Scientists have finished a five-year project to build a genetic map of bovine animals, which is expected to lead to better cattle production, breeding and disease control.
The $70 million project to map the DNA sequence is a joint effort between Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the United States.
Dr Chris Prideaux from the CSIRO says it is now time to apply the science.
"Really this map will speed up the roll-out of things like genetic markers, such traits as meat tenderness [and] for marbling," he said.

Winemakers pay tribute to Len Evans
One of the great names of the Australian wine industry has died at the age of 75.
Wine judge and writer Len Evans is credited with bringing Australian wines to prominence on the world stage, by encouraging a move away from fortified varieties into other blends.
In 1968, Mr Evans founded the Rothbury Estate in the Hunter Valley with Murray Tyrrell.
Mr Tyrrell's son, Bruce, says his father's friend was instrumental in building Australia's wine export industry.
"He was certainly a very important cog in what wheel, there's no question or doubt about that," he said.
"Len was a larger than life personality, and he was one of those people that no door was ever locked to, because if it was, he just opened it and walked through it.

Fed Govt to contribute to wetlands restoration in NSW
The Federal Government will help to fund works to restore two major wetlands in New South Wales.

Rural women's isolation a key topic in youth survey
The isolation of women has emerged as a big issue in a national survey of youth in rural Australia this week.
Workshops are being held in five states as part of the Year of the Outback, to identify key issues and find some answers.
Coordinator Fiona Campbell-Maybury, says women want some kind of network to help them get access to resources.
"They are not necessarily suggesting that the resources are not there, what they're suggesting is that they're not necessarily aware of them," she said.

Wave Hill walk-off celebrations under way
It has been 40 years since the Wave Hill walk-off, a protest which led to the Indigenous rights movement in Australia.
Celebrations have begun in the remote Northern Territory of Kalkaringi, 800km south-west of Darwin.
An overwhelming mood of friendship and reconciliation binds more than 1,500 people gathered by the Victoria River, the site where stockman Vincent Lingiari led his people on strike in 1966.
Originally protesting against the pay conditions on nearby Wave Hill Station, the nine-year strike soon became a battle for land rights.
Among the crowd today were descendants of the original Gurindgi strikers, pastoralists, politicians and visitors from across the country.
As part of the festival an agreement is being signed between the Northern Territory Cattlemen's Association, the Northern Territory Government, the Land Councils and the Indigenous Land Corporation to boost Aboriginal participation in the pastoral industry.

NZ stone fruit growers get WA access
New Zealand stone fruit growers will be allowed to sell their fruit into markets in Western Australia, six years after applying for access.
Biosecurity Australia has made the decision in a risk import analysis, as long as fruit is fumigated and inspected to keep pests out of WA.
Peter Gubler from the WA Summerfruit Council says he is concerned, but does not expect imports to have a major impact, in a market where prices are already lower than in the eastern states.
"Money wise, the commodities like peaches and nectarines, I don't think they'll benefit from that because of the low return that growers here in the state get anyway," he said.

Apple, pear industry unveils competitiveness plan
The apple and pear industry has launched an ambitious research program to make Australian orchards globally competitive.
The million-dollar program, Future Orchards 2012, was unveiled in Hobart this morning.
Years of rising production costs and low prices have left Australian apple and pear growers fighting for survival.
The industry has to reduce costs while increasing the amount of fruit harvested per hectare, and Future Orchards 2012 should prove it can be done.
The current yield is 20 tonnes of fruit per hectare from an average of 640 trees.
Under the plan tonnage would more than doubled and high density planting would almost triple the amount of trees.
The intensive orcharding would also be capital intensive, costing up to $60,000 a hectare.

Labor's ethanol pledge gets mixed response
There has been a mixed response in Queensland to Labor's election promise to make all petrol include 5 per cent ethanol.
Premier Peter Beattie says the mandate would increase to 10 per cent after 2010.
The Premier says the 5 per cent mandate will increase the use of ethanol 20-fold, to over 200 million litres, in a year.
The Opposition says it was their policy five years ago.
Grain growers on the Darling Downs say it is good news, as they have plans to build an ethanol plant at Dalby which will consume 400,000 tonnes of sorghum and produce 160 million litres.
The petrol companies Caltex and BP are less supportive of a mandate and the RACQ says there is no evidence that ethanol blends are being sold at prices below normal petrol.

Red wine fails to meet Chinese standards
China has rejected more than 10,000 bottles of Australian red wine because it contains too much of the preservative sulphur dioxide.
The 840 cartons were rejected by Chinese customs authorities at the port of Shenzhen.
It is understood the wine was bottled in 2003 by a winemaker from New South Wales, whose name is being kept under wraps.
Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation chief executive Sam Tolley says the wine has been knocked back because it does not meet Chinese standards.
"So when the sulphur was added to the wine, the blend wasn't mixed thoroughly, so there's some parts of the wine that have this high sulphur content and the rest would have lower," he said.

Lamb industry thrives despite drought
Although the prime lamb industry is in its fifth year of severe drought, the number of new season lambs coming into the market is expected to rise another 3 per cent in the next 12 months.
Meat and Livestock Australia says that is due to a 16 per cent jump in second-cross lambs, which are produced for meat.
And there has been a dramatic fall in the price of cattle contracts on the Sydney Futures Exchange.

Farmers predict crop failure within weeks
Farmers in Victoria's Wimmera Mallee grain growing region say if it does not rain within two weeks their crops will fail.
The effects of a lack of rain have been made worse by a run of frosts and strong drying winds.
Neil Simpson who has planted 1,500 hectares of wheat at Berriwillock in the southern Mallee says the earlier sown crop is already dying and it is looking bleak for the rest.
"Assuming that there isn't further rain, the late crops will also fail and they may not even produce a head in the circumstances so the outlook is certainly very dismal at this point and continuing to deteriorate," he said.

Nickel shortage causes panic
The London Metal Exchange was forced to intervene in the nickel market last night for the first time since the 1980s, to curb panic buying among metal traders.
Analysts predict there is only enough nickel left on the exchange to cover one day of world consumption.
Supplies have shrunk because of a strike at the world's largest nickel mine at Voisey's Bay in Canada.
In Australia, shares in nickel mining companies have skyrocketed, as speculators predict the situation will not ease in the short term.
Commonwealth Bank commodity strategist Tobin Gorey predicts the market tightness will continue to force up prices.
"In terms of supply being tight yes it will [force prices up]. Whether it is actually so tight that people can't complete transactions is another matter, that's really what defines the current circumstance," he said.

Plan aims to tackle climate change impact on agriculture
The federal, state and territory governments have unveiled a national action plan to tackle the affects of climate change on agriculture.
It is designed to help farmers adapt to a changing climate, mitigate and prevent the impact of change, provide better research and development and increase awareness.
While there is no funding or specific projects yet, Ben Fargher from the National Farmers Federation says it is a significant step.

Australia on track for driest August on record
The National Climate Centre says we could be shaping up for another major drought year if it does not rain soon.
Australia is on track for its driest August on record, with an average of just 2.6 millimetres of rain so far this month, compared to the lowest recorded total of 7.1 millimetres.
Meteorologist Blair Trewin says while south-west WA is in trouble, the eastern states are in a slightly better position because of rain last month.
"[It] certainly hasn't been as dry as years like 1994 and 2002 generally speaking," he aid.
"If we were to have a very dry September/October period then we might start getting down into the kind of territory we saw in 1994 and 2002, but our outlook is not currently indicating a particularly high chance of that happening."

Growers fear Coles Myer takeover
Fruit and vegetable growers are concerned a foreign takeover of Coles Myer could squeeze them out of the market.
A US-based consortium has launched a bid to buy the retail giant.
Michael Badcock, from AUSVEG, fears a sale would leave producers at the whim of major international corporations.
"The biggest problem we've got in Australia is that we have two major supermarket chains and that's it, who control about 70 per cent of Australia's market," he said.
"If one of these is taken over by a big world player - and they're quite ruthless in the way they cut costs and cut staff and everything else - if one does it the other one would do it.
"That would be a disaster for producers in Australia."
The Federal Government can reject takeovers that are deemed not to be in the national interest.
But Griffith University's Tony Makin says even with lobbying, farmers are unlikely to stop a takeover bid.

GE rice contaminates US crop
The US agriculture secretary says US supplies of long-grain rice are contaminated with a genetically-engineered variety which has not been approved for human use.
Mike Johanns has announced that Bayer CropScience of Germany has told the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the US Food and Drug Administration that the experimental rice poses no threat to humans or the environment.
But Mr Johanns does not know where the contaminated rice was found, how widespread it is, or how it entered the food supply.
As for US customers, Mr Johanns says he is "are providing information to my colleagues".
"I'm talking to them. I have indicated to them that we will provide whatever information they need," he said.
Testing kits will be supplied if required and USDA will investigate.

Court to rule on wallaby cull
Plans to cull wallabies on the two biggest islands in Bass Strait are being challenged in the Federal Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
The Wildlife Protection Association of Australia wants to stop approved federal management plans, which allow farmers to shoot and export wallabies on King and Flinders islands.
President Pat O'Brien alleges the plan allows inhumane killing of joeys, breaches the national rifle code and misjudges the size of the wallaby population.
He hopes the case will reveal critical information.
"In the last appeal we had in New South Wales we found out that both Western Australia, South Australia and Queensland had overshot their quotas by about 15,000 animals," he said.
"But they wouldn't tell us unless we sort of had them in court and had them on oath.

Land Rights Act changes please fishermen
Land rights claims over some inter-tidal areas on the Northern Territory coastline will be automatically terminated by changes to the federal Land Rights Act.
The move affects claims won more than three years ago through the High Court and has been labelled "un-Australian" by the Northern Land Council.
But Iain Smith, from the Territory's Seafood Council, has welcomed the changes.
He says some claims had big ramifications.
"If at some future stage a court decided that while water was over Aboriginal land the water and the animals in it belonged to the relevant land trust - it was freehold title - then of course we would be totally excluded from the area unless we paid a fee," he said.

Turnbull urges private water infrastructure investment
There is a call today for more private investment to help solve the nation's water shortages and fix ailing infrastructure.
The federal Parliamentary Secretary for Water, Malcolm Turnbull, has released a discussion paper which includes a national set of guidelines for working with the private sector.
He admits there have been problems with partnerships between the public and private arenas, but says there are major opportunities.
"I don't think many people would support, for example, privatising catchment management authorities or privatising dams or the sources of water," he said.

Rival bids leave Sedimentary's future uncertain
The future of a gold miner with exploration interests at Foster and Walhalla in Victoria remains uncertain, with shareholders offered both a merger and a takeover bid.
Sedimentary complained to the National Takeovers Panel last week that there were unacceptable circumstances around a takeover bid by Auselect.
Now Sedimentary has announced a merger agreement with Premier Gold Mines.
The takeovers panel has decided it will not pursue Sedimentary's complaint about the takeover bid.

Ethanol plant construction under way
Work on Australia's first purpose-built ethanol plant is starting in north-west Victoria today.
Australian Ethanol plans to produce 100 million litres of ethanol annually at the Swan Hill plant, which is due to be completed late next year.
Chief executive Peter Anderton says local farmers will supply it with 350,000 tonnes of grain and corn.
"Corn would provide about a third of the grain required and then the remainder we would source off winter crops, wheat and barley," he said.

116-turbine wind farm approved
The Victorian Government has approved the construction of one of Australia's biggest wind farms.
The 116-turbine wind farm will be built at Mount Gellibrand in the state's south-west.
Despite political wrangling over the future of wind farms in Victoria, Colac Otway Shire Mayor Warren Riches says this project is likely to go ahead.
"I would think this is one project which will almost certainly go ahead no matter which party is in power after November," he said.
"It is in an open windswept area.
"It's not something, for instance, that's on the cliffs of views overlooking the Great Ocean Road or the ocean or anything like that.

Rabbit infestation hits SA crops
The worst infestation of rabbits in 10 years has caused tens of thousands of dollars of damage to crops and pastures on the lower Eyre Peninsula in South Australia.
Early rains and green grass are being blamed for the high breeding numbers, and neither calicivirus nor myxomatosis are having an impact.
Andrew Ware, from Lipson, says his farm has been hit hard.
"Just driving into our property at night-time, usually you wouldn't see any rabbits but at the moment we're seeing five or six just at the entrance to our property," he said.
"I reckon we would have lost perhaps 25 acres of crop.

Leaf rust let loose on feral blackberries
The CSIRO is stepping up efforts to stop the spread of feral blackberries using strains of the fungus, leaf rust.
The scientific body wants farmers to test the fungus on blackberry infestations over the next three years.
Small-scale testing was done in 2004, and the Federal Government has now boosted funding to roll out the project across the country.

Gates to fund agricultural research
Agricultural research and development in developing countries is set for a big boost from the world's richest man.
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation is extending a program which currently supports research and development in the health sector.
Agricultural economist Professor Phil Pardey, from the University of Minnesota, says the funding should make a big difference.
"They've been looking to broaden out in other areas and so they've made an in-principle decision to start ramping up investments into agricultural research," he said.
"The orders of magnitude of sums of money that I've heard are quite mind-boggling - in the hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

Beef production pioneer Wright dies
One of the pioneers of modern beef production in Australia has died.
David Wright, 73, headed up a cattle dynasty based on Wallamumbi Station near Armidale in New South Wales.
He was also responsible for developing the V2V breed of cattle, after crossing Australia's oldest hereford herd with new genetic stock.
Mr Wright's cattle empire fell apart after a long-running legal battle in the 1990s.
The founder of the Co-operative Research Centre for Beef, Bernie Bindon, says Mr Wright was a pioneer of the scientific research which now underpins the industry.
"David Wright left his imprint on many aspects of the Australian beef industry," he said.

Horses among Wyndham races highlights
Horses kicked up dust and punters bet their luck over the weekend, at the 120th year of the Wyndham races in the Kimberley in far north Western Australia.
More than 1,000 people from right across Australia flocked to the port town's mud flats.
Gail Muir from Kununurra says some family connections with the historic meet made it a special day.
"My father-in-law flew from Darwin to Wyndham for the races 60 years ago in a Tiger Moth aircraft, an absolutely fantastic event with just a little bit of hessian all around the place," she said.
"Today I'm here to relive the memories for him.

Pilbara reflects on 40 years of exports
It is 40 years ago today since the first shipment of iron ore from Western Australia's Pilbara region.
In 1966, the 52,00 tonne shipment left the port of Dampier, on WA's north-west coast, bound for Japan.
David Smith, from Pilbara Iron, says Japan remains a major customer but there have been big changes in the past four decades.
"It started off with about a hundred or so people in its first operation," he said.
"There's about 5,000 employees that work in Pilbara Iron now, plus of course a lot of contractors who are important service providers that work and help support the company as well.

Harvey Beef moves to lot-fed cattle
Western Australia's biggest beef processor is moving away from its traditional grass-fed cattle supplies.
EG Green and Sons was forced into administration last year.
The new owner is now trying to make the abattoir more efficient by focussing on lot-fed cattle.
Harvey Beef's chief executive Scott Henderson says it will be some time before the abattoir is running at full capacity.
He says it is unlikely that stock prices will match the eastern states in the short-term.
"The most important thing for us is to cut costs wherever we can and that's what we are doing to make sure that we have profitable business here," Mr Henderson said.

Dingo preservation plan angers pastoralists
South Australian authorities want to protect the pure-bred dingo in the state's far north, but pastoralists are not happy with the move.
The Department of Water, Land and Biodiversity Conservation says some dingo populations in the Simpson Desert should be protected to stop inter-breeding with wild dogs.
But Rodney Fullerton, from Mungeranie Station on the Birdsville Track, says it is unrealistic and impossible to get a balance between conservation and control.
"What happens out there in the desert, in the good seasons there's a lot of dogs out there and they breed up out there," he said.
"Once it gets dry out there in the desert, they come in on these pastoral properties.
"They come in and they play havoc with our calves and they kill them pretty quick because they're hungry.

Pet's death renews hunting debate
The debate over allowing licensed hunters to cull feral pests in state parks has flared again in New South Wales, after a domestic pet belonging to a camper was shot.
Hunters have been given access to 152 state forests this year to help reduce pest problems.
The owner of the dead kelpie, Ross Clissold, has camped in the Double Duke State Forest on the north coast for four years.
He says he had no idea hunters were being used, and he is now reluctant to take his family to the area.

WA drought package targets farmers
West Australian farmers are hoping for rain this week and also have some financial relief in sight, with the State Government unveiling a $5 million drought package.
Farmers in the worst-hit northern agricultural areas can apply for grants of up to $7,500.
The state Opposition wants the help provided to the wider community.

Bacchus Marsh irrigators offered extra water
Irrigators in Victoria's major lettuce growing region are being offered a 5 per cent water allocation to keep going, as long as they are prepared to pay for it.
Growers at Bacchus Marsh, north-west of Melbourne, had faced the prospect of no spring water supplies.
That prompted Australia's biggest producer of coloured lettuces to move his operation to the state's north.
But Clinton Rodda, from South Rural Water, says the expense of transferring the water to irrigators will cost them extra.
