
Sterile fruit flies fail to satisfly partners
Sterile fruit flies have been touted as a way of controlling numbers of the pest insect but researchers say they are not proving to be satisfying mates.
Research has shown female fruit flies are attracted to the sterile males but they are not always satisfied and head off looking for other mates.
Dr Phil Taylor from Macquarie University says they are now trying to fix the problem, to stop them from causing major damage in horticultural regions.
"Wild flies don't seem to mind mating with them, however the sterile males have some issues with the amount of sperm they transfer and then the female's likely to re-mate," he said.

Studies to investigate GM crop issues
The Federal Government has placed further pressure on the states to lift their bans on genetically modified crops by announcing eight case studies into the sector's most contentious issues.
The studies will be done by the Bureau of Rural Sciences and the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics, and the private sector will contribute.
There will be four different reports on the impacts of releasing genetically modified canola, while weed control and the affect on organic farmers will also be considered.

Water trading available for southern Qld farmers
Queensland has given the go ahead for its first water trading scheme involving river systems.
Previously farmers could only buy water attached to land or from government-run irrigation schemes.
Water trading will now be introduced across the Moonie and Warrego catchments in southern Queensland.
An entitlement to access 120 megalitres a day from the Moonie River will be auctioned next month and Clayton Smith from Elders believes it could sell for well over $2 million.
"Existing irrigators will be keen to get more water to do more development on their properties and secure their future," he said.

Mini turbine generates farm power
A Victorian dairy farmer has invented a mini hydroelectric turbine to generate on-farm power.
The Sundermann turbine, named after farmer Fred Sundermann, can be used in slow-moving water, like irrigation channels and streams.
It is about the size of a large washing machine and is designed to generate power in remote areas.
Mr Sundermann says he hopes his turbine can be used to power remote communities around the world.
"I have dreams for the turbine," he said.

Roo shooter numbers may threaten industry
There is concern a record number of kangaroo shooters in Queensland is threatening the industry's future.
Up to 2,000 shooters are registered in Queensland, with 400 new licences granted since October alone.
Jeffrey Newton from the Macropod and Wild Game Harvesters Association says record roo meat prices mean too many people are vying for a share of already limited quotas.
"As with any industry, big dollars attract people that are chasing that quick dollar but unfortunately this industry can't sustain that," he said.

Water in the bank
While water scarcity is not much of an issue in the Top End at the moment, in central Australia attempts to develop a new horticulture industry depend very much on new water saving technology. The water re-use project in Alice Springs has been under development for some time but emerging technology could make a number of similar projects viable and workable. Professor Stuart White from Sydney's University of Technology has worked on water saving projects with governments and councils around Australia and he says there is a new sense of urgency to develop water savings projects. "When we start to move away from the urban sector and talk about water use more generally and remember 80 per cent of water is not used in towns and cities it's actually used in irrigated agriculture and so on, we do have to take a bit of a long hard look at some of the industries that are using water and say is this appropriate and what is the trade off between the impact of some of these industries and the impact on water ways and the benefit we derive from them. However there is huge scope for efficiency there, I mean we're talking about efficiency levels which can be improved even beyond what we're talking about in the cities, in terms of relatively low cost savings, and some of those are starting to be picked up and that's a good thing."

Crop planting to follow weekend rain
Despite the high diesel prices, crop planting is expected to get into full swing across much of Victoria and South Australia this week after good weekend rain.
Most of South Australia's growing areas had rain and there were also falls of between 44 and 30 millimetres across northern Victoria.
Victorian talkback caller Shirley is certainly relieved.
"We've had 51 millimetres. We had one of those scattered thunderstorms. We were actually away for the day and we got home here at about 6:00pm and the further we came towards home, there was more water and we got home and there was just water everywhere," she said.

AWB delegation to investigate wheat pesticide find
A 50,000 tonne shipment of Australian wheat has been stopped from unloading in India after tests revealed unacceptable levels of pesticide.
The shipment, which left the port of Adelaide last week, is now on standby at Chennai port, awaiting further testing from Indian and Australian authorities.
It is the first consignment of a half million tonne tender won by exporter AWB and spokesman Peter McBride says the company is sending its own delegation.
"They have identified that there is a high level of pesticide reading, so AWB is sending a high level delegation to India which will leave today to meet with our customers to address the issue and obtain more information," he said.
"We've run tests here as the ships leave and we'll do that for future vessels.
"We can't really provide further details until we have met with our customers and hopefully we'll have further information later this week or early next week."

Trucking companies to pass on increased fuel costs
The transport industry will start passing on the increased cost of fuel this week as companies begin to include fuel surcharges in contracts.
The Australian Trucking Association (ATA) has been urging operators to act for some time, especially smaller businesses who are struggling to absorb the higher diesel costs.
The ATA's Stuart St Clair says he is relieved at the industry's decision and believes most customers have been expecting it.
"I think the majority of customers would understand because they'd be under some similar price pressures themselves, particularly those that have a lot of vehicles on the road, whether they be stock and station agents or whether they be farmers or others," he said.

New dam plan angers farmers
Farmers are angry over plans for a big new dam in south-east Queensland.
Landholders near Gympie are planning a campaign to try to force the State Government to scrap the idea, which involves the resumption of 900 properties.
The dam is designed to fix the water crisis in the south-east corner of Queensland and will cover 7,500 hectares of prime farm land near Traveston Crossing on the Mary River.
One of the region's biggest dairy producers, John Cochrane, has just spent a million dollars upgrading his farm, which would end up 30 metres underwater.

Ginseng managed investment scheme wound up
Tasmania's ginseng managed investment scheme will be wound up, with a $5 million loss.
There were hopes the scheme could be salvaged but they have been dashed by the poor performance of the ginseng farm near Richmond, in the state's south.

Buderim Ginger's domestic sales drop 6pc
Queensland-based Buderim Ginger says the major supermarket's push towards home brands has resulted in its first drop in domestic sales in 15 years.
The company has announced a profit of $536,000 for last year, up 56 per cent.
Exports have grown 10 per cent but chairman John Ruscoe says domestic sales have fallen away by 6 per cent.
"The retailers are clearly trying to position their own house brands where they can at the most desirable places in the store, which means that our products really are competing with that," he said.

Wet season takes its toll on live cattle exports
The Northern Territory's protracted wet season is having a lasting impact on live cattle exports to South-East Asia.
Feedlots in Australia's largest market, Indonesia, are less than half-full, with another 50,000 cattle needed.
Stuart Kenny from the Territory Cattlemen's Association says cattle prices in Indonesia have gone up but that has not slowed demand.
"There has been more price rises over the last couple of weeks but our visitors are saying that the prices did not detract from the supply and that's a good sign," he said.
"I think the Indonesian economy is certainly sort of holding its own and we certainly look forward to seeing a good cattle season ahead for the NT cattle industry.

Table grape exports resume to Indonesia
Table grape exporters have resumed trade with Indonesia after being shut out of the market last month.
Indonesia has imposed tough new quarantine protocols to reduce the threat of fruit fly, which the industry has branded unworkable.
Some companies have begun fumigating fruit with methyl bromide at a Melbourne facility to meet the new demands but Brett Pickering from exporter Best Fresh says it is not an ideal result.
"There is an additional cost obviously for the treatment," he said.
"In terms of shipping out of the country we lose a bit of flexibility in being able to utilise the Adelaide port for later leaving vessels.

WA native title battle resolved
A 12-year native title battle surrounding the Western Australian town of Broome has finally been resolved.
The Federal Court has recognised the Yawuru people as the rightful native title holders of land surrounding Broome.
The full effect of native title will take place on the Indigenous-owned cattle property, Roebuck Station, while the neighbouring property, Thangoo Station, will continue to operate as a privately-owned lease.
Fred Chaney from the Native Title Tribunal says the decision also extends to areas like the famous Cable Beach.
"The beach is of course a very significant feature of Broome and that is an area where you can't have exclusive possession the court found but where the Aboriginal people have continuing traditional interests which they share with the general community," he said.
"There are areas of town where native title has been found to survive (in other words not extinguished) and there are very large areas outside town, in particular the Aboriginal owned pastoral property which has exclusive possession native title."

Pilbara pastoral strike anniversary remembered
Indigenous people in Western Australia's north-west are commemorating the 60th anniversary of the Pilbara pastoral strike.
Aboriginal pastoral workers walked off stations on May 1, 1946, demanding wages and better conditions.
Fran Heintz from the Wanga Maya Aboriginal Language Centre says the event had a massive impact on Indigenous workers.
"It's been a fairly significant event for the region and in many ways we believe it's a significant national event," he said.
"Some people actually call it the black Eureka. It did set what's been in place now for 60 years and that is the equal respect.

Cattlemen unable to find murdered teen
Cattlemen in Victoria's Barmah forest have been unable to assist police in finding a murdered teenager missing since April last year.
Detectives asked the cattlemen to keep an eye out during their annual muster at the weekend.
Raymond Allen, 17, from Mooroopna, is believed to have been killed and buried in the forest on the banks on the Murray River.
But Kelvin Trickey from the Barmah Cattlemen's Association says nothing was found.
"We haven't detected anything at all ... we're always tracking for cattle, looking for foot marks and that all through the bush," he said.

Parade heralds start to mustering season
The main streets of Alice Springs are closed today to pay tribute to the local cattle industry.
The Bangtail parade celebrates the traditional start to the central Australian mustering season.
Historically the May Day weekend was when cattle from stations around Alice Springs were marched through the streets to the year's first sale.
Today there are no cattle in sight but the Alice Springs mayor will lead the parade watched by about 5,000 people as it makes its way through the centre of the town.
But while Alice Springs is a hive of activity, it is somewhat more quiet on the stations.

Athletic mare takes out campdraft comp
An athletic mare called Roanys Chex, ridden by central Queenslander Pete Comiskey, has taken out Australia's richest campdraft at Rockhampton.
Record numbers of riders competed over the weekend in front of what organisers say was its biggest ever crowd.
Mr Comiskey says his $20,000 share of the prizemoney will come in handy.
"Most certainly there's always plenty of costs in campdrafting," he said.
"It's always a great honour to win the big one and this mare has been very successful for us, to win the clock last year and the Gold cup, and we're very lucky to have her on the truck."

Skilled migrants' minimum wage may hurt business
Meat processors say the Federal Government's decision to set a new minimum wage for temporary migrant workers will hurt regional businesses.
Workers on temporary visas will have to be paid a minimum of $42,000 a year after unions claimed local jobs were being undercut.
The Federal Government says the decision is to help Australia compete against other nations in the fight to attract employees.
Kevin Cottrill from the Meat Industry Council says while it will not stop employers from taking on migrant workers, it will add to costs.
"The big risk I guess is that the expectation of current employees and of unions is that there might be a 7 per cent increase across the board in wages, that would be the big danger," he said.
"We're looking at something in excess of 7 per cent which is a substantial increase given the current rates of inflation so it will certainly have an affect on the costs of the industry."

Rural students sought to fill mining job vacancies
The education sector in South Australia will recruit students from rural areas to meet the needs of the state's mining boom.
With concerns over future labour shortages, a new degree in mining engineering will be offered at the University of Adelaide next year.
Inaugural Professor of Mining Geology, Ian Plimer, says the new course will specifically seek students from outside the city.
"We are really targeting students from the rural areas because the mining takes place in the rural areas," he said.

Animal rights group targets children in education campaign
An animal rights group has announced plans to target 3 million children in 9,000 schools with a program it says teaches compassion and respect for animals.
Voiceless has launched its Animal Club project on the Internet, encouraging children to speak out against factory farming, live exports, and kangaroo culling.
Education Manager Elaine Morris, says it is the first national animal education initiative for children.
"All Animal Club really wants to do is just provide children with the opportunity to harness that natural empathy that most children have for animals, and look at them through a child's eyes," she said.

Blueprint targets strategies to combat rural suicides
The Federal Government has been presented with a blueprint outlining 23 ways to ease the mental health crisis in regional Australia.
The release of the blueprint marks the launch of the Rural Mental Health Network, a partnership of 19 stakeholders from New South Wales.
The Rural Mental Health Network includes mental health support groups, charity organisations, government departments and farming representatives
The network says male farmer deaths from suicide are double that of any other group in the population and is urging governments to take action saying the drought may end, but ramifications such as depression and financial hardship continue for many years.

Farmer confidence falls as oil prices rise
High oil prices and rising Australian dollar have hurt confidence levels among farmers.
The National Australia Bank's agribusiness monitor shows more farmers reported poor conditions in the March quarter than in the December quarter, although they are generally optimistic about the longer term.

Machinery demand falls in wake of low grain prices
Low grain prices are being blamed for a big drop off in demand for broadacre tractors and machinery over the past 12 months.
Sales are booming in the sugar, dairy and horticulture sectors for smaller equipment, but Vin Delahunty from the Tractor and Machinery Association says grain farmers are holding off.
"People who are relying on sales into the cropping areas have really struggled," she said.

Canola growers may benefit from high oil price
The high price of crude oil is causing plenty of headaches, but there could be a positive spin-off for canola growers.
European countries and the US are focusing more attention on alternative ways of producing power.
David Syme from the Grain Pool in Western Australia says they will be looking for more canola.
Particularly in Germany, there's quite a number of new biodiesel plants going up, and that's of course consuming a lot of their rapeseed oil," he said.

Fertiliser supplier's half-year profit rises
Fertiliser supplier Incitec Pivot has reported a turnaround, posting a half-year profit of more than $27 million up nearly 60 per cent on last year.
The company says it is a result of a restructure and high fertiliser prices.

Climate change may shift Goyder's Line
Climate change could force South Australia's iconic Goyder's Line to shift 100 kilometres south.
The imaginary line was drawn in 19th century by surveyor general George Goyder marking the 250 millimetre rainfall area from the Eyre Peninsula around to the Riverland.
He believed the region north of the line should not be cropped.
Peter Hayman from the South Australian Research and Development Institute says with an increase in temperature and a reduction in rainfall, the line could shift as far south as the Clare Valley.
"What we found was that the worst scenario, so the worst amount of warming and the most extreme scenario was for it to move by 2070 as far as as somewhere like Clare," he said.

Turnbull hears river flow worries
The Parliamentary Secretary responsible for water, Malcolm Turnbull, has entered the debate over cross-border water flows in the Condamine Balonne river system.
Landholders in north-western New South Wales have long complained they are missing out because Queensland irrigators are allegedly extracting too much water north of the border.
Mr Turnbull met landholders yesterday and says while the Federal Government cannot force Queensland to change its water management policy, the problem must be addressed.
"There is no question in my mind that when the allocations of water were made in Queensland over the last 2O to 30 years, little or no regard was had to the downstream consequences in New South Wales," he said.

Dam compo discussions too early, says minister
The Queensland Government says it is too early to discuss compensation for farmers affected by a proposed new dam near Gympie, in the state's south-east.
The Government is planning to build a 660,000 megalitre dam on the Mary River, which would involve the resumption of 900 properties.
But Water Minister Henry Palaszczuk says it will be a number of weeks before the Government decides if it will definitely go ahead with the plan.
"Currently it's under investigation but if the numbers stack up, of course that will become the site," he said.

Commercial beekeepers close up shop
The commercial beekeeping industry in the Northern Territory has decided to call it a day.
After the poorest season in memory involving floods, termites, cane toads and a depressed honey market, Kevin Eastburn from the NT Beekeepers' Association says they simply cannot continue.
He says his greatest concern at this point is what the decision will mean for other industries, which rely on local bees for pollination.

Pearl farm purchase 'positive sign for industry'
There are changes under way in Australia's pearling industry, with a major distributor and marketing company buying its first pearl farm.
The Autore group has paid $15 million for Broome-based Clipper Pearls.
Brett McCallum from the Pearl Producers Association says after a tough few years in the sector, the deal has injected a bit of confidence in the sector.
"I think that someone like Autore who is as close to the market and as close to the pearling world as he is, has obviously got great confidence in investing a significant amount of money in this industry," he said.

Tokyo restaurant to use Victorian produce
The Bracks Government is backing a restaurant in Tokyo, which will offer food made entirely from Victorian produce.
Locally-grown beef, lettuce and olive oil will be among the ingredients on the menu at Hiroo 148.
Ross Clarke from the Department of Primary Industries says it is designed to help producers overcome communication problems with Japanese distributors.
"When you put a new product into the Japanese market it takes some time to develop a supply chain," he said.
"Translation is a real issue and communicating with importers about your product.

Beef brand celebrates program benefits
The benefits of marketing food from paddock to plate are being marked by the 10th birthday of one of Australia's biggest beef brands.
Certified Australian Angus Beef began by supplying 12 steers for a Melbourne restaurant.
It now kills 2,000 head of cattle a week, with 80 per cent of the product exported.
Chief executive Michael Pointer says the program has added vale to the product and boosted demand for angus genetics.
"Very simply Certified Australian Angus Beef does not own an animal or a kilogram of beef," he said.

Results of sheep pesticide review still some time away
It will be several months before a report into the health effects of a common sheep pesticide are made public.
The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority is conducting a review into diazinon, which is used to treat lice and flystrike in sheep, after its use caused serious health concerns for some rural workers.

Tests clear Australian wheat shipment
Authorities in India have now cleared a shipment of Australian wheat, just two days after claiming it contained an unacceptable level of pesticide.
A second round of tests has found no contamination in the 50,000 tonne consignment, which is being unloaded at the port of Chennai.
AWB's Peter McBride says the company is not yet sure what caused the mix-up.
"AWB has been officially informed that the wheat has been fully cleared by Indian authorities and the shipment is currently unloading at Chennai in India," he said.
"We had some meetings late yesterday, we'll obviously have further meetings today but the good news is the wheat has been cleared."

Rates hike to hurt commodities outlook
The Reserve Bank's decision to lift interest rates is more bad news for farmers, following on from high fuel prices.
The interest rate rise, to 5.75 per cent, is the first in more than 14 months.
Senior analyst with Hartleys, Rob Brierley, says the announcement will hurt the outlook for commodities.
"Most of the commodities are priced in US dollars so it means that the seller of the commodity actually gets less in Australian dollars for it," he said.

Farmers dispute Govt report figures
Vegetable growers say the Federal Government has made up figures in a report, which shows extended country of origin food labelling would cost consumers $120 million a year.
Farmers want the labels on packaged and canned food as well as fresh produce to give consumers more information and promote locally grown fruit and vegetables.
But the Government says the study shows the costs of the changes would far outweigh the benefits for both consumers and growers.
John Roach from grower group AusVeg says the study was based on flawed data.
But while rejecting new laws to enforce more detailed labels, Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says he wants to change the Trade Practices Act to give consumers more accurate information.
He says under the changes, 'made in Australia' would be replaced for some packaged food to 'grown in Australia'.

Fruit growers attend crisis summit
Australia's summerfruit industry is drafting an action plan to try to keep producers in business.
Peach, nectarine, plum, apricot and apple growers are battling cheap imports and a lack of export sales since access to Taiwan was restricted last season.
Fruit growers are still thrashing out the details at a crisis summit in Melbourne, but Heather Chong from Summerfruit Australia says some priorities are emerging.

Wool pool to help Tas growers
In a departure from the traditional auction system, wool growers in Tasmania will be able to sell their fibre through a new wool pool.
Agribusiness Roberts Limited has launched Wool Link to market Tasmanian grown and branded wool direct to the fashion houses of Japan and the US.
Ten thousand bales will be sold in the first year, and the company says growers will be paid more than they have received on average in the auction rooms.
Marketing manager Eric Hutchinson admits there is bound to be scepticism.
"And for some it's going to be a leap of faith in what we can deliver, there's no doubt about that," he said.

US producers implement animal ID system
US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns says major beef buyers have given the country little choice but to implement a national animal ID system.
The National Animal Identification System could become compulsory if not enough US producers volunteer to join by 2009.
Mr Johanns says in response to industry opponents of animal ID in US, major beef competitors Australia and Canada have already implemented systems to trace and contain disease outbreaks.
And most recently, Mr Johanns cited retail demand in Australia.
"I just noticed that in Australia, a representative of McDonalds, which of course is a major purchaser of beef, made a statement about the need for this animal ID system."
Mr Johanns predicted the US industry will have to change with the times, despite some who oppose new costs and less corporate privacy.

Restraint boxes to improve cattle slaughter in SE Asia
Australia is investing almost a million dollars to improve the slaughter of cattle in South-East Asia.
Fifty restraint boxes are being installed at abattoirs across Indonesia and Malaysia.
The aim is to ensure all Australian cattle are processed humanely within two years.
Meat and Livestock Australia's Patrick Underwood says he is confident the boxes will be used.
"It's a fully galvanised and enclosed box, whereby the animal enters through a raceway into an abattoir, is placed in a restraining box and restrained prior to slaughter," he said.
"I have formed an animal welfare task force, with members of APFINDO (the Indonesian feedlotters and farmers association), so the Indonesian importers are with us, illustrating the clear benefits of using these restraining boxes."

Beef Australia under way in Rockhampton
Australia's biggest beef industry event is under way in central Queensland.
Rockhampton hosts Beef Australia every three years, claiming it is the country's beef capital.
Fifty thousand people are in the city and over 200 head of stud cattle from 34 breeds, making it one of the largest displays in one place in one time in the world.
And the world is in Rockhampton - 450 delegates from 27 countries including Argentina, Indonesia and China.
It is not all conferences and seminars though. The Iron Man and Woman event will see competitors eat marinated bulls testicles and there's a great debate, is beef better than sex?

Decision to abandon water transport plan 'not surprising'
Residents of Western Australia's far north say they are relieved at a decision to abandon plans to transport Kimberley water to Perth.
Three options were investigated by the State Government, involving a water pipeline, a canal or transport by sea.
None have been found to be economically viable.
Kununurra resident Dick Pasfield says he is not surprised,
"I think there was a reasonable amount of scepticism about whether a project like this would actually be viable in terms of the economics," he said.
"I guess that what the report has said is basically what a lot of people thought in the first place, that it's going to cost far too much money to do a project like this."
The WA government is still on the hunt for alternate water sources, looking at options including the Yarragadee aquifer in the state's south-west.

Aboriginal corporation fined for neglecting cattle
An Aboriginal corporation in Western Australia has been fined $10,000 for failing to provide sufficient water for 1,500 head of cattle on a station in the state's interior.
The fine was handed down yesterday after the Windidda Aboriginal Corporation pleaded guilty to the charge brought by the RSPCA.
Tim Darcy from the Pastoralists and Graziers Association says it is important that livestock producers from across Australia stick to animal welfare standards.

Dry conditions take their toll in NSW
Dry conditions are continuing to hurt in New South Wales, where producers in the Upper Hunter are being knocked back from grazing cattle on the travelling stock routes.
A lack of water is being blamed for the situation in Singleton, Scone and Merriwa, where some producers are waiting up to 12 months to access reserves.
Scone ranger Gerard McLaughlin says he does not have a choice, with half the watering points in his area dry.
"There's 590 head at the moment wandering around the roads in my area ... there could probably be a lot more if we had water that's the problem," he said.
"At the moment I'm getting more and more requests for people wanting to go on the road but it's a bit awkward when you can't access water."

Farmers battle fleabane
Farmers in Western Australia are battling a nightmare weed which can take over paddocks and is difficult to kill.
The area affected by fleabane on the south coast is increasing rapidly, with the tall woody plant also spreading into agricultural areas further north.
Dr Sally Peltzer from the state Department of Agriculture and Food says good summer rainfall has made the problem worse.
"I've been out and about actually trying to collect a bit of fleabane and I have seen some pretty nasty paddocks," she said.
"It looks worse because they're sort of tall and hairy looking so that doesn't tend to look, compared to the other, pasture plants or whatever."

Govt holiday workers scheme to be extended
A scheme to use backpackers to ease labour shortages in the horticulture and cropping sectors is being extended to cover livestock, forestry and fishing.
From July, holiday makers who work for three months in jobs like shearing, stock handling and pearling will be able to apply for a second 12 month visa.
The Federal Government will also double the length of time backpackers can work for one employer - from three to six months.
The National Farmers Federation's Denita Wawn says producers would prefer to employ local workers but there are not enough people willing to work in regional Australia.
"At NFF certainly it is our preference that we can [use] locals to work in these jobs but experience shows that people, a lot of people simply aren't interested in working in agriculture," she said.
But some primary industries are highly critical of the changes.
The Territory's pearling industry says the increase to six month work placements will not solve labour shortages, because that's still not long enough to cover the cost of induction and training.
The Horticultural Association says the extension will benefit the nursery, pruning and packing industries but spokeswoman Tracey Leo says there could be a big impact on the mango harvest.
"We are seeing a thinning of the available labour pool. So in short I guess we are now going into competition with industries that we may not have been competing for labour with before," she said.
"In our high volume years, they [foreign workers] are a significant portion of our labour force.

Failure to reach trade deal could delay Doha talks: Vaile
Despite missing a crucial deadline in global negotiations to reduce trade distorting tariffs and subsidies in agriculture, Trade Minister Mark Vaile says a deal can be reached this year.
Mr Vaile flew back into Australia this morning after talks in Europe and says the European Union is now looking at further reductions in the financial support it gives to farmers.
But he is warning a failure to get a deal this year, could delay the Doha Round of talks until 2011.
"That is the great unknown because once we go beyond the northern summer which is fundamentally August, the farm Bill has to be renewed and there's already pressure coming on in Congress in Washington to start writing a new farm Bill," he said.

Govt urged to help pay-off wool debt
The wool industry has made a united call on the Federal Government to help pay a $27 million debt owed by its marketing arm, Australian Wool Services (AWS).
AWS has been responsible for a UK-based superannuation fund for former employees since privatisation in 2000, which is costing the company more than $1.2 million a year.
The debt is holding up any possibility of a merger with research group, Australian Wool Innovation.
AWS chairman Barry Walker hopes industry delegates will meet with Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran within weeks.
"We've been trying now for some 20 months with the Government to get this on the agenda and to get recognition of the issue," he said.

Poppy processor slashes prices
The poppy industry has taken another hit, with processor Tasmanian Alkaloids slashing prices to growers by 17 per cent.
Two weeks ago Tasmania's other processor, GlaxomSmithKline cut its crop area by 90 per cent.
Lyndley Chopping from the Tasmanian Poppy Growers Association says the latest price cut cannot be supported.
"We cannot recommend the prices to the growers and we're not recommending the prices to the growers," he said.
"We feel as though the company is taking advantage of the situation.
"We're very upset with the result of this. So the growers do their figures as to whether they grow again or whether they give the land a spell, or whether they go into another crop or another enterprise. That's their call."

Snowy Hydro inquiry won't delay sale
The New South Wales Government says plans to privatise Snowy Hydro will not be delayed by a parliamentary inquiry into the sale.
A New South Wales Upper House committee made up of Government, Opposition and cross bench members will investigate concerns about the privatisation.
The inquiry is due to report back in late October, although the State Government says the sale will proceed by the middle of the year.
Opposition natural resources spokesman Adrian Piccoli denies it is too late to make a difference.

Minister launches wind farm discussion paper
The Federal Government is investigating a national code for wind farm developments, to try to stop conflict in rural communities.
The Government is embroiled in a legal stoush with Victoria, after overturning approval for a major new wind farm in Gippsland in order to save the endangered orange-bellied parrot.
Environment Minister Ian Campbell has launched a discussion paper on the proposed code, which he says may be the best way of resolving disputes.

Vic juice grade apples can't find buyers
Cartons of juice grade apples are being left in Victorian packing sheds this harvest.
Growers say they are being offered an opening price of $55 a tonne, which is not enough to cover freighting and picking costs.
Beechworth grower Rob Tully says there is added frustration from city-based juice bars, which will only take a-grade fruit.
"Even the juice bars though, are very quality conscious and although they're only making juice fruit they're fairly conscious if the fruit has too many marks on it," he said.

WA potato farmers battle watery conditions
Waterlogged crops are making harvest difficult for the second year in a row for seed potato producers on WA's south coast.
Potatoes from the Albany area usually contribute between $3 million and $4 million to the state's $10 million industry, which exports to South-East Asia and Mauritius.
But wet summer and autumn conditions have halted mechanical harvesting, and Terry Ackley from the WA Potato Growers Association says spuds are rotting in the ground.
"Swamps were still very wet from the last season and we never really had a hot, dry summer to dry them completely," he said.
"And of course this rain has been devastating again.

Agfest crowds brave the Tassie cold
It has been a chilly start to Tasmania's annual rural field days, Agfest, in the state's north.
Coffee sales are up but farm machinery sales are expected to be down.
Querkus Park is a sea of tents, marquees and pavilions, and with an early taste of winter chills, stalls with heaters are proving very popular today.
Agfest is the major gathering for rural industries with more than 700 exhibitors and sales are seen as a barometer of the state's rural industries.
This year, sales are expected to reflect the contract cuts in the poppy and vegetable industries.
The bright spot though is the buoyant dairy industry.

Lamb sales to Japan booming
Sales of Aussie lamb into Japan are booming, with annual growth rates of up to 70 per cent.
Japanese importer Top Trader says lamb is losing its reputation as an unpleasant smelly meat and the market is set to grow, despite looming competition from US beef.
And the good times are set to continue.
Meat and Livestock Australia's Malcolm Harvey says Russia is emerging as the next big market for lamb.
"It's not subject to any quotas, the amount of money and wealth being generated in Russia is just something that's hard for people to comprehend, and they love Australian lamb," he said.

Competition hots up at Beef 2006
It is another huge day at Beef 2006 in Rockhampton in central Queensland.
There is very serious business taking place, amid the trade fair rodeos and the sinking of a few ales.
It is the biggest stud beef cattle ever held in Australia with over 30 breeds on show.
The prime cattle competition was won by Ken McKenzie of Yaralla, near Blackwater in central Queensland.

Farmers wary of govt changes to fuel rebates
Farmers already fighting higher interest rates and the strong Aussie dollar now face changes to their fuel bills from July 1, which could add further pressure to their budgets.
The Federal Government will scrap a tax subsidy rebate worth up to three cents a litre to regional motorists, and change the 18-cent a litre on-road energy credit scheme.
Under the scheme, farmers and transport operators will receive their fuel rebate off their GST bills, instead of a cash grant paid directly into their bank accounts.
Luke Fraser from the Livestock Transporters Association says the changes will create a cash flow headache for rural and regional businesses.
"We have a business where over 30 per cent of our total cost input is fuel. Farmers would probably understand that sentiment," he said.
"And in that sort of position, when you're being asked to go through administrative hoops to try and claim that back, and you never actually see it in cash, it's just coming off a tax bill, well that's a big change.
"To say, look on July 1 it's all going to switch over and everyone will be fine, is incredibly naive and insulting."
A spokesman for Assistant Treasurer Peter Dutton says it will be simpler in the long run to deliver the energy credit to farmers and truckers through their GST bills.

Aileron residents don sombreros for Mexican mutton chase
It is not often you see Mexicans swilling tequila and riding donkeys in central Australia.
But this weekend at the bush carnival at Aileron, 130km north of Alice Springs, you had better be prepared to don a sombrero.
While the adults gulp down beans and tequila and race donkeys, organiser Sarah Debney says it is sheep that people really want to see.
"That's the Mexican mutton chase...we've got teams of two children and the team puts on their ponchos and hats and they run down the other end and do the same scull with water and baked beans, run back and we let sheep out of the shoots and they have to herd the sheep over the line," she said.

Crowds flock to Broken Hill for Agfair
The far western New South Wales city of Broken Hill is packed to capacity today, for the area's biggest biennial event.
There is not a spare motel room available in Broken Hill this weekend as swarms of people have converged into the city to celebrate Agfair.
Three hundred exhibitors are on show slightly down on two years ago, as organisers claim high petrol prices have discouraged some from travelling the distance.

Exchange rates hit wool market
Rising exchange rates and high pass-in rates have hit the wool market again this week.
The eastern market indicator dropped off 6 per cent, to finish the week at 708 cents a kilogram clean.
Prices are 46 cents lower than the season high in March.
Among the offerings were 1,700 bales offered by the New Zealand Merino Company.
A whopping 41.6 per cent were passed in.

Beef program adds to producer returns
A new economic analysis has found the beef quality program MSA is adding an extra 20 cents a kilo to beef producers' returns.
The meat standard was developed by the Beef Cooperative Research Centre and uses a set of scientific criteria to allow consumers to identify beef which is guaranteed to be tender.
Centre head Dr Heather Burrow says the program will add $85 million to beef revenue this financial year.
Overall, she says it has generated three times what it cost to industry to develop.
"Averaging 20 cents a kilo, beef producers, retailers and processors are getting a premium for beef that they can guarantee is better than every day eating quality," she said.
The Bureau of Statistics will conduct a census of livestock producers for the first time in five years.
It will collect data from 190,000 farms across the country and is expected to highlight the value of the cattle industry to the Australian economy.
Census manager, Jim Williamson says the data will help to drive the live export industry.
"Being able to ensure we can meet future export markets if we want to enter into future contracts, we can be confident we have enough cattle to fill the contracts," he said.
"People can keep a handle on whether the cattle herd is going up or down."

Primary producers frustrated at lack of harvest labour support
Primary producers in Western Australia are disappointed at missing out on harvest labour support.
The Federal Government will fund services in 16 harvest areas across Australia, but says tenders from the west were not up to scratch.
The services help to match the pool of workers with seasonal job vacancies.
David McKerrell from the Kimberley Primary Industries Association says it is frustrating funds have not made it to all regions
"It needs to be recognised that there are production areas right across Australia that have a requirement for harvest labour and all areas should be given opportunity to take part in those sort of schemes," he said.

Maritime protected area boundaries to be announced
The Federal Government will this afternoon announce the final boundaries for marine protected areas off the Tasmanian, Victorian and South Australian coasts.
They are expected to be significantly different to the Government's initial proposal, which drew criticism from the fishing and scallop industries for being too strict.
The Tasmanian scallop sector said it would be wiped out if the areas were enforced.

Poppy processor defends price cut
Poppy processor, Tasmanian Alkaloids says its latest price cuts will not be a disaster for Tasmanian growers.
The company will slash prices for the coming crop by 17 per cent, although it plans to double the size of its supply contracts.
The Poppy Growers Association says the price cut can not be supported, but Rick Rockliff from Tasmanian Alkaloids says higher yielding varieties and a better season should help farmers to improve their profits.
"We feel confident that if growers pay attention to detail and follow their field officers' advice, given a more normal season, we're pretty confident that growes will have substantially more money in their bank accounts this time next year," he said.

NFF calls for schools to examine interest groups
The National Farmers Federation is calling on governments to ban special interest groups from unvetted entry to school classrooms.
Animal rights group Voiceless has launched a web-based education program which offers prizes for the most humane school and encourages children to speak out about factory farming, kangaroo culling and live exports.
NFF president Peter Corrish says the website has links to extreme animal rights groups.
"What we're saying is the principals of each school and certainly the parents of the children involved need to have a look at this website and actually go to these links and see what information their children may be accessing," he said.

Shareholders expected to launch class action against AWB
A class action by shareholders against monopoly wheat exporter AWB is expected within weeks.
Investors will seek compensation from AWB, alleging the company did not report its activities truthfully.
The Cole Inquiry has spent the past four months investigating AWB's actions under the oil for food program in Iraq.
Ben Slade from Maurice Blackburn Cashman, says the class action will raise a number of issues.
"The most extraordinary positive act of misleading conduct we think is October 27 when the company issued a statement to the stock exchange after the Volcker suggestion was made in 2005 that the company may have been involved in sanctions busting," he said.
"The company made a statement to the stock exchange that it was not. Well that's another course of action that is even more powerful."
AWB shares have defied stockmarket trends to gain ground this week, despite the Reserve Bank's decision to lift interest rates.
AWB stocks fell considerably during the Cole inquiry, but yesterday gained 5 per cent.
Stockbrocker Matthew Baker says the prospect of more trade with India is behind the gains.
"But basically AWB has got on with its job and it's gone out there and it looks like it's going to win more business in India which is basically ship more product out the door," he said.
"Their price will vary because of the currency side but they're happy because they're going to be selling a lot more stock."
The Indian Government is expected to announce a tender for 3 million tonnes of wheat within a week.
Soaring domestic prices and a lower than expected crop are putting pressure on Indian authorities to provide enough wheat for the population.

Milk, cheese, yoghurt prices to rise
On top of petrol hikes and higher interest rates, the cost of food is now on the way up.
National Foods and Fonterra say they will lift prices for milk, cheese, yoghurt and fruit juice products by up to 3 per cent, and supermarkets are expected to pass on the increase to shoppers.
The increases are to try to cope with increased packaging and transportation costs.
For farmers it is a different story, with most unable to increase their prices.
Andrew Young from the Central Markets Association says farm gate prices will not change just because wholesale prices have gone up.
"There's not an automatic link essentially unless they've got contract pricing in place, which for a lot of sectors of the industry that just doesn't exist, it's commodity market pricing," he said.

NFF seeks regional road and rail spending commitments
Farmers are calling for regional roads and rail spending to come before further investment in the Future Fund when Federal Treasurer Peter Costello hands down the Budget tomorrow night.
The fund is designed to cover future superannuation payments to public servants.
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) is warning the Government against boosting investment in the Future Fund and adding to the surplus, at the expense of infrastructure spending and tax reform.
Chief executive Ben Fargher says the Government must commit to lifting the standard of grain rail lines in New South Wales and Victoria.
And he is calling for basic all weather road access to farms and the sealing of all designated arterial roads by 2013.
"Farmers need to actually get the produce from to the farm to the National Highway in the first place," he said.
Mr Costello is already talking up big money for regional roads and rail, with spending expected to be in excess of a billion dollars.
"Better transport means a better economy with a higher speed limit for growth," he said.
The Government is also hinting at capital gains tax reform, which should help succession planning for farmers.
Meanwhile transport operators in the Northern Territory are looking for funding in the Budget to improve remote roads.
For the past fortnight 60 road trains have been unable to cross the Victoria River, west of Katherine, due to damage caused to Highway One by flooding.
The delay is estimated to have caused the industry at least $7 million, with weight restrictions only lifted at the weekend to allow single trailers through.
Scott Van-Loom of Shaw's Darwin Transport wants to see remote road funding announced tomorrow night.
"It has been the longest [delay] for a number of years. It was two weeks, which just put Darwin in chaos from Perth," he said.
"We had seven road trains there, there was a total of 60 waiting in Kununurra to get through. That was coming north, coming south there was probably about 40 road trains waiting on this side.

Oil price may pass $US100 a barrel
A transport expert says although biofuels and ethanol may help in the long term, nothing can stop oil prices hitting highs of $US100 a barrel.
David Lamb, who heads the Energy Flagship of the CSIRO, says there is no way production of any alternative fuels can match more than about 1 per cent of our energy needs.
His concern comes as a world expert on energy markets, Claude Mandil, warns that with strong demand and falling supplies, oil prices could eventually rise above $US100 a barrel.
Mr Lamb says without any alternative fuels, cutting consumption is the only option.
"By 2011 our Government's plan is to be producing 350 million litres of ethanol per year but that's only about 1 per cent of the amount of oil we use so that's no solution by 2011," he said.

Wool prices expected to pick up
A new report says wool prices are about to climb again, despite seven weeks of losses.
The eastern market indicator is 46 cents per kilogram below the seasonal high recorded in March.
The latest business survey from marketing body Woolmark says the fall was inevitable, with not enough demand to support high prices.
But with stronger orders coming through from China, western Europe and East Asia, Woolmark economist Kerry Stott says prices will pick up through the June quarter.
"It's the best it's been in almost five years," he said.
"The really good thing is that it's more widespread geographically than in the past and not only that, it seems to be more widespread right through from combing through to weaving.
"And I think if people look at what's happening to our prices in US dollars, and see that our prices are still going up in US dollars, they'd be pleasantly surprised."
The eastern market indicator closed at 708 cents a kilo clean on Friday.
Woolmark's prediction is being backed by some analysts.
Elders Queensland wool manager Maurie McNeill expects a decent recovery based on price indications out of China.
"We can probably see 20 per cent retracement of the losses that we've seen in this market over the last four or five weeks, particularly in the finer end of the market," he said.

Fears new marine park boundaries will force out fishermen
The fishing industry says new boundaries for proposed marine parks off the coasts of Tasmania, Victoria and South Australia will not restrict commercial fishing as much as first thought.
After complaints about the draft boundaries, Federal Environment Minister Ian Campbell has now finalised the plans for the marine protected areas, which will cover 200,000 square kilometres of ocean.
Although the Government will provide $220 million compensation, Ross McGowan from Seafood Industry Victoria is worried about fishermen who will be forced out of the industry.
"For us to sit here and say 'it's minimised' is all well and good. But the end of the day these marine protected areas will have a significant impact on some individuals, so significant that they will have to get out of the industry," he said.

Digging finally under way at new gold mine
On the back of record prices, another gold mine has opened in Western Australia.
Tanami Gold has begun work at the Coyote project in the Tanami Desert, south-east of Halls Creek.
There have been delays to starting the desert operation because of the wet season.
With the price of gold above $880, Tanami chairman Dennis Waddell is relieved to be finally digging.
"We've had plenty of rain and that has just delayed access more than anything, but we've made that up," he said.
"We started mining on Friday, which was a pretty momentous day. The excavators and dump trucks arrived last week and we took the first bucket of ore out on Friday afternoon."

Resources boom raises housing shortage fears in silver city
The resources boom has raised fears of a housing shortage in the silver city of Broken Hill, in far western New South Wales.
With the opening of the Bemax mineral sand mine and the development of the Honeymoon uranium mine, there are concerns the town will not be able to accommodate an influx of workers.
Broken Hill real estate agent Jim Hickey says the mining industry is now looking to house workers in serviced apartments, which are in short supply.
"We're going to be shortly in need of some good development if other companies start to bring people in," he said.

Golden Circle back in the black
Queensland food processor Golden Circle has announced a jump in profits, less than three months after appointing a new chief executive.
Despite losing $26 million in 2003, the company made a $10.4 million profit before tax last year.
Chief executive John Cox says he has also improved communication between the company and its grower shareholders.
"Golden Circle recognises that we are going to have to do things a lot smarter, and more in line with our growers," he said.

Cotton results receed expectations
A gamble on this year's cotton crop appears to have paid off, although yields are down, and quality is mixed.
With harvest in full swing in New South Wales, the results are better than expected, despite a record-breaking summer heatwave.
Although growers in the Macquarie Valley faced almost zero water allocations at the start of the season, Auscott Macquarie planted almost 75 per cent of its normal acreage.
Managing director Chris Hogendyke says most has made it though.
"We got lots of allocation increases during the summer and the crops the crops turned out to be really good," he said.
"We're looking at about 10.5 bales per hectare average and we're very happy with the result.

Olive oil shortage drives up prices
South Australian olive growers are looking forward to a bumper harvest this year, with prices up and more orders than oil.
A poor European crop has compounded a worldwide shortage of olive oil, pushing prices up to between$5.50 and $6 a litre.
Olives SA chair, Lisa Rowntree, says even with the higher prices, olive producers will not be able to harvest enough oil to meet demand.
"Sales are fantastic. This is very much a seller's year for olives," she said.
"I've sold everything that I'm responsible for selling in the region and all the other growers as well have sold their olives and we could have sold them probably twice over.

Gelbvieh bull takes champion award
A Gelbvieh breed of bull has been named supreme male champion at Australia's biggest stud cattle competition at Rockhampton, in Queensland.
More than 2,000 nominations across 33 breeds for the title made it the biggest stud cattle competition in Australian history.
Guyra producer Michael Jackson, who owns the winning bull "Double J Zulu", was understandably happy about the win.
"We have been showing cattle for nearly 20 years now, and we've never won anything like this," he said.

Mine rescue comp highlights important skills
Mine safety is in the spotlight, as rescue workers continue to try to free two trapped miners in Tasmania.
Over the weekend miners in Western Australia have been testing their rescue skills at the Surface Mines Rescue Competition in Kalgoorlie.
Cindy Lewis from the Jundee gold mine, who won the best captain award, says competitors were thinking of the trapped miners and their rescuers in Beaconsfield.
"We were confronted with a situation last year at our minesite," she said.

Water costs to push commodity prices up
A national conference has heard rising water costs will push some irrigators out of primary production.
The Irrigation Association of Australia's conference in Brisbane has also heard high water costs will push up commodity prices.
Chief executive Jolyon Burnett says some irrigators face rises of up to 4,000 per cent, as water authorities move to recover more of the delivery costs.
"It is important that we attach a more realistic value to water and that there be signals, if you like, to the growers to value that water and to improve their efficiency."
Despite the rising costs, Professor Paul Perkins from the Australian National University predicts Australia will be one of the few countries in the world with enough water to grow its own food in 25 years time.
He says it is a great opportunity to expand exports.
"The global water shortage is much worse than the Australian water, so-called water crisis," he said.

Vic experts play part in mine rescue
Three mining explosives experts from Victoria have played a role in the final stages of the Beaconsfield Gold mine rescue.
The tunnel inching towards the two trapped men hit very hard silt stone, which resisted the hand drills and jack hammers.
General manager of Stawell Gold Mines Mark Mitchell says the men tested the explosives in other parts of the mine before they had to be used in the Beaconsfield rescue shaft.
"We sent the guys down to help with the PCS type explosive, which you would have heard people talking about," he said.
"We use that at Stawell Gold Mines for a number of tasks. It's something we use in the normal course of our operations. We don't consider it to be a particularly specialist thing, it's just something we have some experience in.

India tenders for 3m tonnes of wheat imports
Wheat exporter AWB will face tough competition in the latest tender from India for 3 million tonnes of wheat, which was announced overnight.
The Indian market has emerged this year as a replacement for traditional markets in the Middle East, which are buying cheaper wheat from Europe and the Black Sea.
Grains analyst Malcolm Bartholomaeus says that has left Australia and the US struggling to find other customers for last year's bumper crop.
"India is very important both for Australia and for the global wheat market this year," he said.
"Egypt, of course, is a major importer of wheat. Right at the moment they tend to be favouring cheaper wheats out of Europe and Russia, so that both Australia and the US are missing out on that particular market.
"In terms of the Australian crop, and obviously losing a lot of market share in Iraq, India is equally important from that perspective as well."
While AWB has confirmed it will tender for the contract, details on price and volume remain confidential.
Meanwhile, it is unclear if some of AWB's legal costs for the Cole inquiry will come out of the returns for the national pool.
The legal bill is likely to have blown out from the $16 million AWB shareholders were told about at the annual general meeting in February.
The chairman of AWB International, Ian Donges, says AWB Limited is picking up all accounts at the moment.
But he says there is still discussion about whether some of those should be passed onto AWB International on behalf of the pool.

Local councils 'starved of funds'
With a quarter of all local councils in New South Wales on the brink of financial collapse, farmers are calling for changes to Australia's system of government.
A symposium held in Sydney has heard experts on governance discuss how local councils are struggling to cope with new responsibilities and a lack of funds.
Former president of the NSW Farmers Association, Mal Peters, says state governments are ignoring rural communities and what is needed is a system of government that is closer to the people.

Credit scheme changes anger farmers
Impending changes to the energy grants credits scheme have not been welcomed in rural Australia.
Until now, claiming the 18 cents a litre credit has been a simple process of posting off a claim form and getting the money back quickly.
But from July 1, the fuel rebate will be delivered through the GST reporting process.
For farmers and other agricultural businesses who are not filing a monthly Business Activity Statement, it will take much longer to get the money back.
Livestock transporter Jim Savage, from Tamworth in New South Wales, fears delayed payments will create problems with cash flow.
"See you, you gotta be up front to pay your fuel bill, otherwise there'd be no fuel," he said.

Bananas doing big business for NSW farmers
Banana growers on the north coast of New South Wales are continuing to harvest some spectacular profits in the wake of cyclone Larry.
Mullumbimby wholesaler Jan Trueman says cartons of fruit that fetched about $10 to $12 before the devastation of the Queensland industry, are now worth between $60 and $80.
He says it is set to become even more lucrative as winter approaches.
"Oh most definitely, for sure," he said.
"Our fruit is, y'know, is at a premium now and going into winter, I mean our fruit starts to slow up anyway, so it's only going to get dearer and dearer.

World trade changes pose problems for fruit growers
Tasmanian apple growers are feeling the pressure of change in Australian horticulture and are hosting a meeting later this month to address their future.
Thomas Frankcomb from Fruit Growers Tasmania says the industry is at "yet another cross roads", with significant changes in global production, market prices and the threat of cheaper imported fruit.
He hopes the meeting will help growers make choices about their future and believes the issues are bigger than just one state or one sector.

PETA takes aim at Middle East
Animal rights group PETA says it will target Middle Eastern countries for the first time, as part of its campaign to stop live exports from Australia.
The group says it will reveal alleged abuses in slaughterhouses in several Gulf countries at a press conference next week in Dubai.

Incitec Pivot to buy Southern Cross
In a complex stock market deal, superphosphate fertiliser company Incitec Pivot has announced it plans to buy out Australia's only producer of ammonium phosphates, Southern Cross.
Trading in Incitec Pivot shares has been halted for two days while share holders learn details of the deal, which includes Orica selling its 70 per cent share holding in Incitec.
Incitec will recommend share holders buy back Orica shares.
Chairman of Incitec Pivot John Watson says the 35,000 farmers with shares in the company should enjoy significant growth in profits.
"All this does is add to our manufacturing base a very important strategic asset, not only for our business but for the farmers of Australia as well," he said.

Scientists successfully grow southern bluefin tuna cell cultures
In a world first, South Australian scientists have grown cell cultures of the southern bluefin tuna.
Flinders University and the CSIRO have grown the cells so they can experiment with antioxidants to extend the shelf life of tuna and test for viruses.
Dr Kathy Schuller from Flinders University says it is much cheaper than using live tuna worth $50 a kilogram.
"We can test 24 different concentrations and combinations of antioxidants at a time," she said.

Unwanted grapes to be used in non-alcoholic sparkling wine
A small group of grape growers in South Australia hope to use up their unwanted fruit by cracking into the non-alcoholic sparkling wine market.
The Virginia Horticulture Centre, north of Adelaide, has begun a pilot project to see if it is viable.

Dingoes may be used to sniff out cane toads
Enlisting dingoes is the latest suggestion to help keep Western Australia free of cane toads.
Dog trainer Sarah Fyffe has applied for a licence to use dingoes as sniffer dogs at the border and in bushland between Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
She says dingoes are naturals for the outdoor job,
"We're not talking about working in a building, we're not talking about working in an airport, we're talking about working in rugged terrain," she said.
"[It is] very unforgiving - and where's the dingo from? That's its natural habitat and they cope brilliantly with it and know how to handle the elements."

Budget good news for rural Australians
There is a fair bit of good news for rural Australia out of Treasurer Peter Costello's 11th Budget.
There is more than $2 billion in extra funding for roads and rail, money for the Murray River and a big crackdown on illegal fishing.
There are also wide ranging tax cuts, which are supposed to leave more money in our pockets and changes to capital gains tax to make it easier for farmers to pass on their properties.
President of the National Farmers Federation Peter Corish is certainly happy.
"This Budget is probably the most positive budget that Treasurer Costello has delivered for rural Australia," he said.
"NFF had three major priorities leading into this Budget, the first one was sustainability, the second one was infrastructure and the third one was taxation relief for rural Australia.
"And I can say that positively we've had movement on all three areas."
More rural Australians will also be able to access the aged pension.
There will also be incentives for farm and mining businesses to invest in new plant and equipment with changes to depreciation rates.
There will also be around $50 million for extra mental health services in country areas.

Vaile starts Budget sell
The Deputy Prime Minister and leader of the Nationals, Mark Vaile, has been out this morning telling rural areas the Budget sets up the bush to take advantage of the current resources boom through big infrastructure spending.
He is especially proud, as most National party members are, of the $2.4 billion in roads funding he says the Nationals have helped secure.
"If you are talking about regional Australia, my view is one of the most important targeted components in this budget is that $307 million of extra money directed at local governments for local roads and bridges this year, they're the important things to regional Australia," he said.
When Australia's peak rural lobby group the National Farmers Federation says this is the best Budget in 11 years, that should not leave too much room for the Opposition to be critical.
But that has not stopped Labor's agriculture spokesman Gavan O'Connor describing the Budget as missed opportunities.
His point is you can have all the new bitumen in world but if it is not too dear to drive on that bitumen because of high fuel prices and higher interest rates, well the big spending backfires.
He is also talking up what he says is the Government's failure to target its infrastructure spending, failure to address environmental issues and failure to ease skills shortages in regional areas.
"No mention of the productivity challenge and no attempt to get on top of the foreign debt," he said.
"No attempt to address the massive skills crisis in rural Australia and there's no movement on the last great frontier for Australian agriculture that is the regeneration of our soils.
"There is no attempt to engineer through these expenditures a new wave of research and innovation in the rural sector.
"On that basis I think there will be some significant questions asked about this Budget."

Punters
What do the punters think of the Budget?
"For me, I'm in a retirement age so the amount that I can earn tax-free has gone up, the threshold there, so I think the threshold for low-income earners has been very good," one person said.
"It's quite encouraging about the water, that's going to be the biggest problem and I think people in the towns have got to realise that they've got to pay more for their water and not be so greedy and they've got to do something about storage," another said.
"I think the Budget lacks vision because it should have looked at the longer term infrastructure issues and I just think that politicians are driven by short term decision making all the time which we pay a big price for," a third person said.

Economist warns about spending
The tax cuts are expected to ease pressure on rural households which have faced higher petrol prices and grocery bills in recent months.
The experts say while the cuts will not put pressure on interest rates in the short term, there are no guarantees the Reserve Bank will not increase rates towards the end of the year.
ANZ chief economist Saul Eslake says there are still reasons to be cautious about spending.
"Even allowing for the fact that people in rural areas tend to drive longer distances than those in the city, the tax cuts are enough to offset the most recent roughly 10 cent a litre increase in petrol prices and the rise in interest rates," he said.
"But any further rise in petrol prices or indeed in interest rates would probably be sufficient to eliminate the benefits of the Budget tax cut altogether."
Meanwhile Treasurer Peter Costello told a media conference yesterday the only way fuel prices will come down is if the cost of crude oil falls.
There is more than $11 million allocated for two new studies on the use of biofuels but Greens Senator Christine Milne says Mr Costello is wasting his time spending up big on roads, when it is becoming too expensive to drive on them.
"He's about the only person in Australia who doesn't see increasing oil prices as a major issue," she said.

Industry group concerned about lack of initiatives
There is concern about a lack of initiatives in the Budget to improve the national skills base and tackle the labor shortage in Australia.
Although new measures have been announced to make it easier for overseas workers, the Australian Industry Group says the Budget should have made more progress in big nation building projects.
While happy with many of the initiatives announced for business and the road funding, Heather Ridout says there is a long way to go to provide the necessary infrastructure to improve productivity and cope with future demand.
"I think that's another area where there could have been more done," she said.
"They're certainly bringing forward some of the spending which is important, some increase in road funding but it needs a more coherent plan.
"We still need better interaction between road and rail, I think we still need more of a national plan and that's got to be really agreed between the states being very big spenders in this area.

Little in budget to encourage exploration, says mining group
The WA Chamber of Minerals and Energy says there is little in the Budget to encourage exploration in the resources sector.
The industry wants a flow-through shares scheme to boost exploration but did not have any joy last night.
Chamber director David Parker says more needs to be done there as well.
"This is something which industry has been arguing for a number of years," he said.
"We see exploration as very much the future of the resources industry.
"We are tending to rest on our laurels in terms of the future sustainability of the industry.
"I think if you look at the medium to long term outlook for renewing Australia's resources inventory we really are at cross roads.

Budget fails to tackle climate change, green groups say
The Federal Government has come under fire from green groups, which claim the Budget fails to tackle climate change.
The major allocation in environmental spending is $500 million for the Murray Darling Basin Commission.
