Senator Abetz is rejecting suggestions that Australian forest products have been banned and is confident that the Australian Forest Standard will hold up to international scrutiny.
"We as a government can rely on robust, peer reviewed, scientific evidence and we will be putting the facts fairly and squarely before these governments," he said.

Ewe market remains firm
Ewe prices are going against the seasonal trend and maintaining good saleyard prices across Australia.
It is believed to be partly due to flock rebuilding after the drought and also a switch away from the high inputs and uncertainty of cropping.
Breeding stock is in demand from growers put off by narrowing grain profits.
Aaroy Yiori from the national livestock reporting service says farmers want ewes mainly for the prime lamb market.
"Re-stocker demand's pretty strong, especially on females and that's certainly one of the things that's underpinning the market," he said.

Bare bummed sheep producing better wool: expert
Research is showing that merinos which are naturally bare in the rear end produce better fleeces than those from other sheep.
The discovery of the sheep on South Australia's Eyre Peninsula two years ago raised hopes of using breeding to end the need for mulesing and crutching.
Professor Phil Hynd from the University of Adelaide says a study of the sheep has also found that the trait can be bred into commercial flocks.
"Bare sheep don't produce less wool, they actually produce more wool," he said.

Goat abattoir back to full production
The nation's largest goat abattoir has returned to full production today, two days after telling 140 workers they would be laid off temporarily.

Rainfall figures recover in most areas
Although some parts of south-east Queensland are still very dry, the National Climate Centre says the rest of the country has done well out of recent rainfall.
The centre's latest drought statement shows rainfall figures have recovered in most areas over the past year, with isolated dry patches in Tasmania, Victoria and New South Wales.
Climatologist Blair Trewin says charting rainfall patterns over three to 12 month periods can be helpful.
"Really the time scales that drought matters on depends on what you're trying to do," he said.

Rice farmers back in production
After years of low water allocations and tough growing conditions, rice farmers in southern New South Wales are relieved to be back on their harvesters this month.
During the drought, many farmers thought they had grown their last crop but with growing demand for rice, more growers are returning to the crop.
Rice grower Tim McKindley, at Caldwell near Deniliquin, says providing there is enough water around, rice has a good future.

High prices revive southern Qld fruit and veg industry
A major fruit and vegetable growing district in Queensland is celebrating some of its best produce prices in decades.
Hot summer conditions saw a drop in production on the Granite Belt in the state's south, forcing prices to triple in some cases.
Stanthorpe capsicum grower Cameron Gow says the high prices have revived the local industry.

Citrus growers export returns tipped to fall
Australia's citrus growers will be able export more fruit to the United States this year but returns are tipped to fall.
A larger navel crop is expected this season and 1.9 million cartons of oranges are expected to be exported.
Stuart Monaghan from DNE World Fruit Sales, which imports Australian citrus into the US, says growers will have to accept lower prices to sell the fruit and compete with South Africa.
"We've got to get retail prices in the US down to where consumers will start buying them right away rather than starting off at higher prices," he said.

Local customers remain priority for WA banana growers
Western Australian banana growers continue to face pressure to send fruit to the eastern states.
Two and a half weeks ago, fruit from Carnarvon was raised as a solution to an impending nation-wide banana shortage in the wake of cyclone Larry in Queensland.
But agent John Mercer met growers in Carnarvon last night and he says while the pressure from the east is intense, Perth markets still remain a top priority.
"We're now two and a half weeks wiser then we where before. Certainly the overwhelming thing that came out of the meeting last night is that we want to supply WA customers first," he said.
"If per chance the demand from the eastern states gets greater than that, there's a possibility we may send some fruit east. My guess is long term we'll send a little bit of fruit over there."
Meanwhile the Federal Government has promised to review assistance given to cyclone-affected farmers in north Queensland if necessary.
Banana growers have criticised the Government's $200 a week wage subsidy to keep workers on farms.

Grazier borrows boat to help save flooded cattle
A western Queensland grazier says he has had to use a boat to save cattle from floodwaters on his property.
Heavy recent rain has dumped 150 millimetres on the town of Aramac in the past 48 hours, leading to record flooding in places.
Andrew Cowper from Merino Downs says he had to borrow his neighbour's boat to get to his cattleyards and stop weaner cattle from straying into the fast running water.
"I was worried we'd lose them if they'd got swept out of the smaller creek into the main Belltopper creek," he said.

AWB rejects wheat export system plan
AWB has rejected a new plan to overhaul the wheat export system and says it is wrong to make changes based on assumptions the industry is in crisis.
The plan, unveiled by the Grains Council, would remove AWB's power to block other companies exporting wheat and increase shipments from AWB's rivals.
Attacking the plan, AWB chairman Brendan Stewart told Grains Week delegates, the industry was not in crisis because of the Iraq kickbacks scandal.
"What I see at the moment is a debate that's being done is a vacuum and debate that's being done in a self-induced crisis mode which I have to say is not there," he said.
The discussion paper suggests AWB could lose the single desk in 2010, while a new body called Australian Wheat Associates would take over the company's veto powers.
But AWB's Ian Donges told delegates is was dangerous to base Australia Wheat Associates on industry companies like Meat and Livestock Australia.
"I wouldn't use that as a model that necessarily is going to deliver a better outcome just because it is a model. There are other ways of doing it," he said.
Mr Donges also says the timelines to implement the plan where unlikely to be achieved.
The discussion paper has also been criticised by growers and AWB's rivals.
The New South Wales Farmers Association says it will not support any plan which increases exports through companies other than AWB.
There was also an attempt from one grower to call a no-confidence motion in the Grains Council.
The Grain Exporters Association's Alick Osborne says while the plan provides for increased export competition, it does not go far enough.
"This may go some way to sharpening that process up if there are other exporters that can access particular markets and can post their bids," he said.

CBH profit drops
WA grain handler and marketer Co-operative Bulk Handling (CBH) has reported a net after-tax profit of $61.4 million.
That is down $40 million, as a result of a 3 million tonne drop in last season's grain harvest.

Residents warned as river continues to rise
Police are warning the residents of Katherine in the Northern Territory to be prepared to evacuate as the Katherine River continues to rise.
The Katherine River has grown into a mighty brown fast flowing flood today, a flood that has already broken its banks outside of town and is now scant centimetres from doing the same in Katherine itself.
While police are hoping the river will peak shortly at 18.89 metres, there is the continued possibility the river will continue to rise and authorities are warning residents to pack up the essentials and be prepared to hear the evacuations sirens.

Abattoir expected to confirm sackings withdrawn
The Cowra abattoir is today expected to confirm it is withdrawing termination notices for 29 workers.
The decision to sack the employees and offer lower paid contracts became a major test of the Federal Government's new industrial relations laws.
One of the affected workers, Rodney Veney, says he is thankful for the national attention on the Cowra abattoir because it helped save his job.
"Cowra's only a pin dot on the map and to get all this attention I think management might have been a bit shocked about it," he said.
"As I said, they've taken the termination notice back but if I didn't have the job at the abattoir I'm in a bit of a difficult position.

Rural doctors want funding for more psychologists
Rural doctors say new funding for mental health services must take into account the lack of psychologists in regional Australia.
The Federal Government will spend $1.8 billion increasing psychology services and introducing new programs for young people to cope with depression.
Dr Ross Maxwell, president of the Rural Doctors Association, believes a plan to employ mental health nurses in medical clinics is a good approach for country areas.
"I think it has the potential, if well managed and well delivered, to make a difference," he said.
"I think the initiatives around employing mental health nurses in psychiatrists and general practice rooms, I think that is a very interesting and innovative way forward.

Exporters can protect themselves against interest rate rise: strategist
Talk in the financial markets this week is not good news for farmers or the resource sector.
Markets are abuzz with speculation that interest rates could soon rise for the first time in more than 12 months.
The forecast has led currency market speculators to buy the Aussie dollar, pushing it up by one US cent in one day.
Interest rate strategist with Macquarie Bank Rory Robertson says any rate rise would be small and exporters can protect themselves.
"Australia's got this once in a generation commodity price boom going which would tend to produce upward pressure on the Aussie dollar," he said.
"Yet the Australian dollar last week was hovering around its post float average and most economists would say that is a bit bizarre.

Farm succession debate under way in Dubbo
The difficult issue of handing the farm over is being debated at the first national conference on farm succession this week at Dubbo, in New South Wales.
There is a growing recognition that few individual professionals, like accountants, counsellors and consultants have all the skills to help farm families through the succession process.
Victorian accountant Peter Nelson says the conference has helped him realise the benefits of obtaining other specialist advice to help his clients.
"Most definitely and there are people who do these sorts of things, you know they're more trained and suited to the project. We just need to resource them and bring them into our system," he said.

Cattle sale under way in freezing conditions
Cattle buyers from across Australia are braving freezing conditions in Bothwell in Tasmania, where 5,500 weaners are going under the hammer.
It is the largest single cattle sale in southern Australia, with buyers from South Australia and New South Wales.
Chris Taylor from Roberts Limited says prices are expected to be high but that will not deter interstate buyers.
"The mainlanders that have come to this sale over the years have been happy to pay what's considered as a premium price," he said.

New strains of stem rust disease found in SA
South Australia could be facing one of its worst cropping seasons for the fungal disease stem rust.
New strains of the disease have been found in wheat plants from across the Eyre Peninsula and the southern half of the Yorke Peninsula.
Hugh Wallwork of the South Australian Research and Development Institute says wet conditions over summer helped the disease to thrive.
"I think it would be the most that I have come across in the last 20 years," he said.

Blue gum woodchip shipment set for Japan
The first shipment of plantation blue gum woodchips from western Victoria and south-eastern South Australia is being loaded at Portland.
The 21,000 tonne load will head for pulp and paper mills in Japan tomorrow and eventually half a million tonnes will be sourced locally each year.
Nick Kingsford from Mitsui Afforestation Limited says this first load is a significant milestone for the industry.
"It's the first commercial shipment and there's a significant resource out there and from here exports are just going to continue to grow," he said.

Indonesian islands focus of rural development workshop
Agroforestry could be a major step towards food security across Nusa Tengarra Timur.
The islands, in eastern Indonesia, are the focus of an international rural development workshop in Kupang this week.
Small remote rural villages relying on subsistence agriculture providing for their daily food requirements have developed stands of mahogany, sandlewood, teak and cashews.
There are also small pockets of original forest vegetation within the broader tropical savannah grasslands.
But it has been agreed that non-timber forestry products such as honey, dyes, medicines and fruits could be further developed to generate income.

Exporters concerned about Indonesian ban
Horticultural exporters say Indonesia has effectively banned imports of table grapes and other Australian produce, in retaliation for the Papuan asylum seeker affair.
Table grape shipments were stopped indefinitely yesterday afternoon after the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service received notification from Indonesia of a new export protocol, which exporters say is unworkable.
Indonesia is Australia's second biggest table grape market, worth more than $50 million.
Brian Ceresa from exporter John Holman and Company says he is in little doubt what has caused action from Indonesia.
"My personal suspicions are simply a knee-jerk reaction coming from the Indonesian Government over the refugee status of the West Papuan situation which has been well publicised over the last seven days," he said.
AQIS says it is trying to get to obtain more information about the export protocol, but believes it's likely to affect all countries, not just Australia.
Trade Minister Mark Vaile says he is now investigating the situation in Indonesia, but has not received any notification of an official ban on horticultural produce.
He say he will not consider compensation for exporters who might experience delays until more in known.
"I mean it's happened in the past and we'll have a look at the issue on its merits if that eventuates," he said.

US senator seeks US action against AWB
A key US senator claims the Bush administration has sided with Australia instead of American wheat growers in the oil-for-food scandal, and will use the allegation to press for US action.
Just days after asking the Bush administration to probe whether the AWB violated US laws or WTO trade rules, top Senate Agriculture Committee Democrat Tom Harkin has cited US cables first disclosed in the Cole investigation.
"We've now discovered that the Bush administration advised the Australian Government on how to handle the Australian Wheat Board's growing public problems about its dealings in Iraq," he said.
"This is very troubling. It appears the administration, outright dismissed any credibility to the Australian Wheat Board's contributing to the Hussein regime, under the UN's oil for food program."

US farm payments tipped to fall
Domestic farm payments in the United States are likely to fall under a new farm bill to be introduced next year.
The US has offered to reduce tariffs and subsidies as part of the Doha world trade talks, but will need to reform its domestic policies first.
Visiting Australia, senior economist with the US Department of Agriculture, Carole Goodloe says average farm incomes are well above other sectors, and government assistance is harder to justify.
"Just about all the major players are saying it's time for some reform," she said.

Key US retailers back wool campaign
Two key US retailers have backed the wool industry's multi-million dollar test marketing campaign to get American shoppers to buy more wool.
Three bodies are funding the campaign, including Australian Wool Innovation, promotional body Woolmark, and the International Wool Textile Organisation.
Head of Woolmark Brenda Mcgahan says the campaign, to be launched in September, is also trying to boost the price of wool for growers and manufacturers.
"It is a major issue for our growers and also for the international wool pipeline," she said.
"A consumer can't buy wool if the retailer doesn't stock it, and a retailer isn't going to stock wool if they don't think consumers are going to buy it.
"We'll be working with their buying teams and their sales associates, because why would a consumer pay a premium for something if they don't understand the benefits and a good sales man or woman needs to be able to explain to a consumer why you're going to pay more for a product."
Those two US retailers have not yet been named.
Australian Wool Innovation has appointed Dr John Keniry to chair its 2006 WoolPoll Panel.
Dr Keniry led the review in the live animal export trade in 2003.
The poll of woolgrowers is held every three years, to set the level of the wool tax.
The wool market slipped again at auctions this week, with the eastern market indicator dropping off eight cents, to 728 cents a kilogram clean.
Landmark agent Rodney Peglar, says while a seasonal record was paid for a superfine bale from northern region, the broader wools performed particularly poorly.
"It's two markets, there are the good wools and unfortunately due to seasonal conditions the buyers are having tremendous trouble being able to find enough wool to make batches up that are sound, or of the right quality," he said.

River level steady in Katherine
The river is steady, and the water very slowly draining away from the streets of Katherine in the Northern Territory.
The Stuart Highway south of Katherine has now re-opened to light vehicles, although the central part of the town remains flooded. Traffic north to Katherine is restricted to essential vehicles, and the road north to Darwin is still impassable.

Weather keeps WA forecasters busy
Life in Western Australia's north-west has never been busier for staff at the Bureau of Meteorology at Port Hedland.
Category two Cyclone Hubert is expected to cross the Pilbara coast late tonight.
It is the seventh cyclone to affect the region this year and forecaster Gavin Edmonds is quickly becoming a household name across the north west.
"It's been very busy hasn't it this season and a lot of people utilise, I suppose my service," he said.
"I've got both phones sometimes attached to both ears and there's obviously people queued up on the end of those.

Bird flu confirmed in UK
The deadly H5N1 strain of bird flu has been confirmed in the UK for the first time.
Tests on a wild swan in Scotland have confirmed the disease.
The Scottish Government has set up a surveillance zone and banned the movement of birds in or out of the area.
Germany has also reported its first case of bird flu in commerical poultry, and in Africa, H5N1 has reached the continent's largest city of Lagos, in Nigeria.
Meanwhile, the latest quarantine surveys in East Timor show there is still no sign of avian influenza.
Four major initiatives are underway to increase the chances of early detection, and to help the East Timorese prepare for the disease.
Dr Emma Watkins says improved public awareness, rapid disease testing and helping plan scarce resources are key points.
"Effective surveillance really relies on being able to investigate disease as it comes along," she said.
So the capacity of the local animal health authorities to do that, is really important. So we have undertaken a continuous effort to increase the capacity to locally diagnose this disease.

Researchers aiming for safe Q-fever vaccine
Scientists at James Cook University in Queensland are working to develop an alternative vaccine for Q-fever, which will not produce debilitating side effects.
Q-fever is a highly infectious disease usually caught after contact with affected animals, which causes flu-like symptoms and can be fatal.
The university's Ray Layton says the new vaccine will be developed over the next six to eight months.
"In fact it's one of the only vaccines out there at the moment where you need to be screened before you're vaccinated to make sure you can actually be vaccinated without too many adverse affects and that probably stems I think from the fact that they culture this organism in chicken eggs, and a lot of people have adverse reactions to those egg yolk antigens," he said.

Cattle sales strong
Arctic conditions at the Bothwell calf sale in Tasmania yesterday did not deter cattle buyers from around Australia.
Nearly 6,000 calves were auctioned for around $3 million.
The top price for the day of $880 a head went to Ellendale graziers Greg and Tania Downham for their Hereford-Charolais steers.
Many of the calves will be shipped to Victoria, South Australia and New South Wales.
Greg Downham says prices were up on last year and the calves were in excellent condition.
"We've had an exceptional season, the best that we can remember for a long time, the spring and summer have just been something out of the box," he said.

US abuzz about Aussie bees
Bee hives are being stolen from almond orchards in the United States, leading to a rapid growth in imports from Australia.
The bees are vital to pollinate the country's rapidly growing almond industry.
Barry Pobke from the South Australian Apiarist Association, says thousands of kilograms of bees could be exported every year.

Wet causes havoc in north-west Qld
Life saving carnivals usually have a fair bit to do with water, but in north-west Queensland too much water has forced the cancellation of an annual fund-raiser for the Royal Flying Doctor service.
Heavy rain around Kynuna, between Winton and Cloncurry, has flooded properties cut the Landsborough Highway, leaving dozens of travellers stranded.
The cook at the local Blue Heeler Hotel Matthew 'cookie' Messina says the big wet is causing havoc.

Flooding delays Asian live cattle exports
Flooding across the Top End has created major delays in live cattle exports to Asia.
Ships bound for Indonesia are expected to remain anchored in the Port of Darwin until after Easter and the market is expected to swing towards available slaughter cattle.
Steve Ellison from the Northern Territory Live Exporters Association says at least 9,000 cattle are stranded.
"Due to the wet weather at this stage they are having trouble getting them out," he said.
"It will certainly affect saleyard numbers and obviously the movement of cattle wherever.
"The roads are closed, stock camps have got to be able to work to put the cattle in the yards even if the yards were open. So it's a double whammy really.
"[But] the condition of the cattle is excellent, but no it looks like being a boomer season. We'll get the numbers, it's just a case of you have got to be patient."
Meanwhile the Territory's third biggest town is in recovery mode after last week's flood.
Businesses in Katherine have resumed trading, residents have returned home to assess the damage and the Health Department will begin mosquito spraying today.
Local mango grower Peter Marks says the water is falling away quickly and he does not think the flood will delay this year's flowering.
"Another grower spoke to me the other day and he's got one block on the river," he said.
"He's got a house there and the house is high and dry but he said the water was flowing through the trees, not that deep but he didn't see any great concern with it.
"In fact we find if we have a big wet, we have some sections of the paddock that stay quite wet and they always flower the earliest.
"So they're a weird creature, where none of us have got them worked out too good yet. Pretty amazing."
North-west of Katherine, residents across the Daly River region are preparing for major flooding within the next two days.
A king tide near the mouth of the Daly River mid-week is also expected to have an impact.

Official aims to settle trade dispute with Indonesia
Efforts are under way to rescue Australia's $35 million horticulture trade with Indonesia.
Exports of grapes, citrus, apples and pears are effectively suspended after the Indonesian Government imposed surprise new export protocols.
Australian quarantine officials stopped issuing permits for Indonesia on Thursday, although a shipment of grapes worth nearly a million dollars was already at sea and is in danger of being rejected.
David Minus from the Australian Horticultural Exporters Association says a federal trade official has been dispatched to Indonesia to try to settle the dispute.
"Australia is fighting for its horticultural survival and we need every market we can hang on to," he said.
"Indonesia is after all a big market, it's not the wealthiest but it's a very big market and it's right on our doorstep.
"We're ideally placed to serve it with temperate fruit and sub-tropical citrus that they have difficulty growing in Indonesia."
Table grape growers hope the quarantine dispute can be resolved quickly.
Australian Table Grape Association president Nick Muraca says despite initial fears, the political dispute over asylum seekers from Papua does not appear to have caused the problem.
"I don't believe that to be the case nor do we have any reason to believe that that is the case," he said.

PM to give statement to AWB inquiry
Deputy Prime Minister Mark Vaile is about to step into the witness box at the oil-for-food inquiry in Sydney.
His appearance comes as the Prime Minister, John Howard, confirmed he has been called on to provide a sworn statement to the inquiry.
Senior counsel assisting the inquiry John Agius told a packed hearing room, the Prime Minister will supply by 4pm tomorrow his confidential statement documenting when he first learned of irregular payments by AWB to the Iraqi regime.
This afternoon, Mr Vaile's examination will explore what and when the Trade Minister knew about money paid to the Iraqi Grains Board, the Jordanian trucking company Alia and secret cables advising of complaints by the US Wheat Associates about Australia's inflated wheat contracts with Iraq.

Drought relief funding increase raises questions
The Productivity Commission says the Federal Government's 100 per cent increase in drought relief funding may need investigation.
Drought relief is set to top $600 million in 2005/06 and receives special mentions in the commission's annual review of government expenditure.
Chairman Gary Banks says the commission is not questioning the need for assistance but says any single item costing more than half a billion dollars could spark calls for a review.
"There is always a questions about that," he said.
"We never know whether we have got the model exactly right in any area of industry support.
"Clearly drought assistance is extremely important and you wouldn't want to make any changes without very careful examination of all the issues.

Flooding continues in western Qld
Flooding is continuing to cause problems in Queensland.
Heavy rain in the state's central mid-west last week has cut roads around Longreach but flooding in the Thomson River is expected to be a boon for graziers.
Moderate flooding is now expected to extend downstream to Jundah.
Further north, the barramundi are biting after the floodwaters and Arthur McDouall almost landed one in the main street of Normanton.
"Threw a line in down there for a while virtually at the end of the main street, had a barra on there almost straightaway, got him to the edge of the bank and he jumped off the hook but you get in the right place at the right time they get some good catches when the floods are on," he said.

Merger set to create third largest Aust agribusiness
The stage is set for the formation of Australia's third largest agribusiness behind Elders and Landmark.
The majority of shareholders in New South Wales based Ruralco have agreed to a merger with Tasmanian company, Roberts Limited.
Ruralco chairman Richard England says the two companies will combine their wool, livestock, real estate and rural merchandising businesses.
Mr England expects the board of Roberts to endorse the offer at a meeting today.
"The offer is five Ruralco shares for every eight Roberts shares," he said.
"The merged group will have a market capitalisation in excess of $160 million.

Tomato producer calls for eradication of new plant virus
Australia's chief plant health officers will try to control rather than eradicate a new tomato virus in Queensland.
Yellow leaf curl virus has been confirmed for the first time in Australia at farms on the outskirts of Brisbane.
It is carried by silver leaf whitefly and quarantine measures are expected to be announced this week.
James Head from Queensland's largest tomato producer, SP Exports, says an eradication program would have been better.
"I'd say control is probably the easier option to take," he said.
"Whether or not the effects will be what's desired for the outcome, whether control would be better than eradication, I'd say eradication would sound the better idea.

Dairy farmers win milk price rise
Western Australian dairy farmers have won another price rise for their milk.
Fonterra lifted prices one and a half centres a litre last month but farmers said that was not enough.
The company will pay another half a centre per litre to milk suppliers to its WA-based subsidiary Peters and Brownes.

Sheep shearing via phone may ring true in the future
Shearing sheep in the future could be as easy as dialling a number on your mobile phone.
Researchers at the University of South Australia are looking for a bioactive substance which would cause wool fibres to break simultaneously at a predetermined time.
The new method of alternative shearing is still a few years away but researcher Michelle Hebard says the possibilities are endless.
"The animals would receive an implant, this may be in the ear at tagging time," she said.
"That implant would contain a bioactive which would be activated through the mobile.

Country meets city at Royal Easter Show
The country has come to the big smoke for the Sydney Royal Easter Show - Australia's biggest.
The Royal Easter Show is an event on an amazing scale - 15,000 animals competing for over half a million dollars in prizemoney over the two weeks and 900,00 people are expected to come to watch them do it.

Good turnout for district fundraiser
Around 200 people turned up in the tiny WA town of Yuna for the district's biggest fundraiser at the weekend.
The Whelarra Regatta started around five years ago and involves small teams rowing handmade rafts across a 170 metre dam.
People crowded the banks to see the teams race.
Carisa Grylls of Chapman Valley was in the UDL team and says it was a great day to show off the community.
"Well we didn't really think that we were going to win the race, so we kind of thought that we'll head towards the bar," she said.

US corners Iraqi wheat market
As the oil-for-food inquiry drags on, new figures show US wheat exports to Iraq over the past year have grown almost five-fold.
The US exported about 500,000 metric tones of wheat to Iraq last marketing year before the UN Volker report on alleged AWB kickbacks to Iraq led to a cut-off of AWB shipments and a surge in US exports.
"For the past year, we've captured almost three-quarters of the Iraqi wheat market, which is quite large, which is well over 3 million tonnes and we've gained a very large share of the Iraqi rice market," Bob Riemenschneider, grain and feed director at the US Foreign Agricultural Services, said.
The US has exported about 2.4 million tonnes of wheat to Iraq so far this marketing year and Mr Riemenschneider expects that to increase gradually in coming years.
Meanwhile the US is ramping up pressure on Australia's single desk for wheat exports, as Federal Government ministers begin appearing before the Cole inquiry.
Key member of the US Agricultural Committee Senator Tom Harkin says Australia agreed to rein-in trading monopolies in its free trade agreement and the single desk goes against world trade rules.
Spokesman for Senator Harkin, Dave Townsend, says the US is ready to respond to the Cole inquiry's recommendations.
"Keep in mind this is in the context of the WTO negotiations and I think it's fair to say that everyone is looking to have more transparent and open market through any reform in the WTO and having a monopoly in charge of wheat exports prevents that from happening," he said.

US dry spell looks positive for Aust wheat growers
A continuing dry spell in the United States is looking positive for wheat growers here in Australia.
Monthly supply and demand estimates were released by the United States Department of Agriculture overnight and are largely unchanged.
But national pool manager for AWB Limited David Johnson says the dry conditions are expected to have an impact on America's hard red winter wheat crop, which is in direct competition with Australia.
"We've already seen downgrades in their production forecasts in Texas and Oklahoma in the southern states," he said.

Govt knew of new Indonesian fruit and veg protocols
The Federal Government says it has known for almost a year that Indonesia was planning new import protocols for Australian fruit and vegetables.
The conditions were imposed last week and growers say the $35 million export trade is effectively at a standstill.
The Federal Government believes Indonesia put in the protocols aimed at protecting it from fruit fly after receiving an infected fruit shipment from another country.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says Australia lodged submissions on the protocols last year but did not hear back from Indonesia until the conditions were imposed on April 4.
"Indonesia did not respond to the submission of Australia and the various other countries before deciding on a new decree," he said.

Centre to make sure biosecurity experts up to the job
Making sure the experts are up to scratch will be one of the tasks of a new biosecurity risk analysis centre in Victoria.
The Federal Government has commissioned the University of Melbourne to investigate how Australia assesses biosecurity threats and whether it is being done well enough.
Professor Mark Burgman says part of his job is working out the best way to keep Australia free of diseases like foot and mouth or bird flu.
"Initially our focus is biosecurity and we will develop tools to help people do that job better," he said.

US beef processor banned from exporting to Hong Kong
US meat exports to Asia have been dealt another blow, with a major processor banned from exporting beef to Hong Kong.
A shipment of Cargill beef was found to contain fragments of bone in contravention of export regulations designed to prevent the spread of mad cow disease.
Chief market analyst at Meat and Livestock Australia Peter Weeks says the news will not affect Japan but the latest controversy could delay the resumption of US exports to Korea.
"But outside of Hong Kong is far more significant particularly in Korea where they have linked their reopening, the timing of their reopening to instances, to the previous instance as well as the third BSE case in the US and the circumstances surrounding that," he said.

Brazil beef exports no threat to Australian markets: producer
There are claims today that Australia will not have to compete with the world's biggest beef exporting country in our key markets for at least a decade.
Beef producer Chris Ward has been working in Brazil for 20 years and says the country is struggling to increase its 174 million head herd due to a poor currency, lack of infrastructure and low commodity prices.
Mr Ward says the major inhibitor is the presence of foot and mouth disease, which will continue to lock Brazil out of Australia's major markets of Japan, Korea and the US.
"In terms of competing with Australia in the premium market that Australia plays in, I don't see that," he said.

Resources industry staffing problems expected to worsen
Finding and retaining staff is one of the biggest issues facing Australia's booming resources industry, according to a new study.
The People at Work report, published by the Chamber of Minerals and Energy, says the issue is only going to get worse.
Author Bernard Salt says the problem in hanging onto staff has a lot to do with different values between the generations.
"We have always assumed that we're the best country in the world and everyone will automatically want to come to Australia to work," he said.

Pastoralists expect to double cattle production
Northern Territory pastoralists expect to increase cattle production by 50 per cent within the next 10 years, according to the first comprehensive survey since the early 1980s.
Better fencing and water points in central Australia, and improved pasture in the north would result in the increased carrying capacity
Pastoral extension officer Trudi Oxley says improved weaning rates also mean more production.
"We came up with a weaning percentage across the NT as being 71 per cent, so for every hundred cows there were 71 weaners pulled off them when they were mustered and a mortality rate around 3 per cent," she said.

Leather business suffers from impact of drought, cyclone
A leather tanning business in south-east Queensland has been dealt a double blow.
Murgon Leather has been forced to impose water restrictions due to the drought, while its main supplier of hides closed in the wake of cyclone Larry.
The Innisfail Meatworks will remain shut until the end of the month.
General manager James Barbeler says the leather tanning business has been forced to cut back on staff and production.

Sheep's temperament has impact on reproductive rate
'Crazy' sheep are more than just a nuisance in the yards - research has found they are are also less fertile and less productive.
Dr Alex Ball of Sheep Genetics Australia is looking at the impact of temperament in trials on his property at Armidale in New South Wales and elsewhere across Australia.
He says a nervous temperament can have an impact on how well sheep reproduce.
"We have just been basically tagging animals be they crazy or calm and what it has had is impacts on reproductive rate," he said.
"So we know our own crazy ewes they are probably rearing 20 to 30 per cent less lambs and that's mirrored by some very good research in Western Australia.

Victorian takes out young auctioneers award
A 24-year-old Victorian auctioneer has won the National Young Auctioneers Championship.
Adam Mountjoy from Mansfield in Victoria's Alpine region received the highest score after being judged on diction, presentation and manner during a sale of four steers at the Sydney Royal Easter Show.
He says it is very rewarding after working so hard to prepare for the competition.
"Just going through previous videos and competitions that have been held and I guess analysing and picking out the good points and some of the better things to do or try, and do on the day," he said.

Farming grants to aid environmental projects
The Federal Government wants to give farmers cash incentives to encourage them to carry out environmental improvements on their land.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran has set a deadline of 2008 to implement the scheme, which he says will improve the environment and lift farm productivity.
Mr McGauran will not say how much the plan will cost but says the National Farmers Federation's call for a billion dollars in compensation is well off the mark.
"No where near in the ball park but before we lock ourselves into positions why don't we find a way forward," he said.
"We'll fund some pilot projects and I'm glad to say the states are showing some interest and a number are showing strong support.
"If we work cooperatively we'll find a way to strike the balance between conservation or environment and production."
The NFF has welcomed the announcement, and says the scheme should not be viewed as a cash handout or production subsidy.
President Peter Corish says farmers manage 60 per cent of Australia's land and deserve to be rewarded for their environmental works.
"Farmers are asked to manage that native vegetation at their own cost and we believe firmly if the community wants to maintain that native vegetation, certainly that farmer should be rewarded for managing that," he said.

Court postpones decision on AWB 'apology' document
A decision on whether AWB's so-called 'apology' document should be made public has been postponed until late April.
This morning the Federal Court ruled it would allow further evidence from AWB supporting its claim of legal professional privilege.
The document was initially provided to the Cole inquiry along with other evidence prepared by AWB company secretary Dr Richard Fuller.
A draft apology, it was written by former managing director Andrew Lindberg, after a US-based public relations specialist advised AWB to over-apologise, to try to counter any corporate scandal relating to the oil-for-food program.
At this morning's hearing, the Federal Court heard AWB would provide a second witness statement testifying the apology was prepared as part of lawyer-client meetings and as such should remain confidential.
AWB also questioned the power of Commissioner Terence Cole to make any rulings around lawyer-client confidentiality, an issue disputed by lawyers acting on behalf of the commission.
A full hearing has been adjourned until April 24.
Meanwhile another two senior staff members have resigned from AWB.

Yellow leaf curl virus outbreak hits tomato growing region
There has been a confirmed outbreak of the tomato yellow leaf curl virus in one of Australia's major tomato growing regions.
Plant biosecurity officers are in Bundaberg in south-east Queensland to increase surveillance and identify the spread of the virus, discovered in a backyard garden.
The disease was only recently detected in Australia, near Brisbane and can stunt plant growth and slash production.
Hydroponic grower David Da Tra says growers need to keep the virus carrier at bay.
"Just hoping we can control or minimise the vector which is the silverleaf greenhouse," he said.

Horticulture industry suppliers on notice to cut costs
Suppliers of materials, machinery and other goods to the horticulture sector have been placed on notice to cut costs to growers.
Fruit and vegetable growers have launched a class action against cardboard box maker, Amcor, seeking up to $300 million compensation over alleged price fixing on packaging.
They claim 17,000 growers and some major food manufacturers were overcharged more than $700 million for boxes and pallets.
Mike Badcock from grower group Ausveg says growers are now looking at costs across the sector.
"It seems quite suspicious doesn't it. America, the fuel price is only half what we pay in Australia, to put a pivot irrigator up in America, it costs you between a third and half what it costs to put one up in Australia, fertiliser is a lot cheaper in new Zealand," he said.
"We've really got to get to the bottom of a lot of these things in Australia and find out why it's costing us more to farm in Australia."
Despite claims farmers are losing bargaining power, a new report says selling produce under contract does not place growers at the mercy of big business.
The report, commissioned by the Australian Farm Institute, says there has been substantial growth in the level of farm produce sold on the contract system and prices are not necessarily falling.
Report author Mark Barber says it depends on the farmer.
"It opens up all sorts of new opportunities and some farmers will benefit more than others from this," he said.

Riverland citrus growers locked out of Indonesian trade
Citrus growers in South Australia's Riverland have been locked out of selling fruit to Indonesia despite being free of fruit fly.
Australia's $35 million fruit and vegetable trade with Indonesia is at a standstill because of new import protocols designed to address fruit fly concerns.
The Riverland's fruit fly-free status is recognised by other Asian markets like Japan and Taiwan but not by Indonesia's newly imposed quarantine protocols.
Judith Damiani from Australian Citrus Growers says it is an important market.
"It's not one of our largest markets in terms of volume or value but we do send quite a significant amount of mandarins and valencias as well," she said.

Dairy Farmers restructure goes ahead despite profit
Despite posting a half-year profit of $4.7 million, the Dairy Farmers Co-operative will push on with a restructure involving the closure of four plants.
The Bomaderry factory, in the south-east of New South Wales, shuts down today, while the Toowoomba plant, in southern Queensland, will close by the end of this month with the loss of 12 full and part-time jobs.
Chief executive Rob Gordon says changes across the business are expected to save $42 million a year.

Locusts swarm across WA wheatbelt
Locust plagues are emerging as a big concern for winter crops in Western Australia this season.
Locusts have made their way from the wet pastoral regions into agricultural areas, with farmers now reporting locusts swarms across the wheatbelt.
Senior entomologist with the Department of Agriculture Kevin Walden says the green feed in the agricultural regions could help locusts survive for weeks.
"We're likely to see these locusts surviving into May but by the time the females are completing their cycle, then numbers will drop off very quickly," he said.
"But, as I said, if the break of the season's early, then there may be a bit of an overlap between crops emerging and locusts still flying around.

Arid zone research group research to focus on desert areas
Pastoralists and researchers from around the country have taken the first step towards creating a new arid zone research group.
The group will work independently of state and territory organisations, focusing on problems that affect pastoral production in all desert areas.
Mark Ashley from the 21st Century Pastoral Program says initial research will focus on reducing input costs and improving technology for the wool and beef industries.
"As it stands at the moment most of the state agencies are focused with their particular industry," he said.
"A lot of these issues are big issues, they go across state boundaries.

Weather blamed for hike in fish prices
Fish prices in Melbourne have jumped by up to 20 per cent in the lead-up to Easter.
An unusually high number of low pressure systems with high winds have kept many small fishing boats off the water.
Ross McGowan from Seafood Industry Victoria says the smaller boats catch most of the fish bought by restaurants and which are also popular at Easter.
"They generally catch the fish that end up in restaurants and the Victoria market for example," he said.
"Whiting, flathead, mullet, the whole range of snapper of course.
"They're the sorts of fish the bay and inlet fishermen catch, including calamari.

Pasture shortage limits cattle feedlot expansion
A shortage of pasture in some provinces of Indonesia is limiting the expansion of small community cattle feedlots.
Rather than feed grain, villagers rely on leucaena, legumes, kapok and even banana stems and leaves.
It can take up to 12 months to fatten cattle in this way for the lucrative Jakarta market.
Researcher Maximilian Kapa says one feedlot can support up to 15 remote families in West Timor.
"It is a very good market, especially the Jakarta market," he said.
"Actually the farmers here cannot fulfil the market demand because there is a trend that the population of Bali cattle declines here every year due to uncontrolled breeding and minimised management like that.

I didn't see rorts cables: Howard
Prime Minister John Howard has told the Cole inquiry he does not believe he received or read any cables that warned AWB was involved in sanctions-busting.
Mr Howard was under tight security when he arrived at the commission to explain when he first knew about AWB's improper payments to the Iraqi regime.
Blocked-off streets, bag searches and sniffer dogs greeted those who entered court two on level five of the building ahead of the Prime Minister's long-awaited appearance at the Cole inquiry.
The Prime Minister spent a brisk 42 minutes in the witness box.
When senior counsel assisting, John Agius, asked him to put a date on his knowledge that the Iraqis were rorting the oil-for-food program, Mr Howard said it was probably a year before a speech he gave on Iraq to the National Press Club in March, 2003.
When asked if he knew AWB was involved in that rorting, Mr Howard replied: "No, I didn't. I had always believed the best of that company. It would never have crossed my mind it would have behaved corruptly."
Commissioner Cole refused any cross-examination of the Prime Minister, saying it was outside the terms of reference. 

Petition
Meanwhile a petition supported by some of the leading lights in the legal profession is calling for a widening of the inquiry's terms of reference.
Lawyers, barristers and academics from the University of New South Wales say AWB and the Federal Government may have violated international law by allowing bribes to be paid to Saddam Hussein.
Petition leader Ben Sawell says it is now clear the powers of the Cole inquiry are too narrow.
"There is a great deal of concern in the legal profession about the conduct of the Australian Government in all of this business of the oil-for-food scandal," he said.

Wine grapes dumped as oversupply woes hit growers
Tens of thousands of tonnes of Riverland wine grapes will be dumped on the ground or left to rot on the vine this season because of the national oversupply.
The South Australian growers have been left with no market for their fruit after some had contracts suspended, while others were not able to renew their agreements with wineries.
The region's lost income could total $65 million.
Loxton grower Glenn Arnold says the situation is desperate.
"We're just trying to survive," he said.
"Everybody says there's swings and roundabout and you know good times are followed by bad times, bad times are usually followed by good times ... we've just got to hang in there.

WA wine producer secures large UK contract
Palandri wines of Margaret River in Western Australia has just secured the state's single largest export ever into the United Kingdom.
Eighty thousand cases will go to 1,800 British supermarkets.
Palandri's Gordon Grant says WA is being recognised as producing a unique, quality wine for under $24.
He says the contract is significant for bulk producers of generic wines.
"It's really starting to gain ground, the buyers in particular are staring to see Western Australia as something very different to the other material they have got on their shelves," he said.

Farmers environmental grant 'pork barrelling'
The Federal Government's plan to pay farmers to better manage the land has been labelled a "veiled production subsidy" and a "pork barrel" by a Canberra think tank.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran wants to give farmers cash payments to better protect the land and lift their productivity.
He believes farmers are carrying an unfair share of the costs of managing the environment and should be rewarded for carrying out projects which benefit the entire community.
But the Australia Institute's Andrew Macintosh says the Government has a poor record of delivering environmental projects and in allocating funding to regional areas.
"What we've seen with the Natural Heritage Trust is that the program's turned into a massive pork barrel that's dressed up in green clothing and that's my big fear with this," he said.
Mr McGauran says the program will not become a spending black hole and denies the proposed payments would become production subsidies.

Paying more for early child care an option, says association
Regional Australia is having to think creatively to overcome shortages of childcare places and funding.
Cost and access are still big problems for many farming families who now rely on a second income to make ends meet.
Lynne Wannon, from the National Association of Community-based Childcare Services, says both parents and governments need to consider paying more for early childhood care.
"There are different models around, there are mobile services where they have outreach programs," she said.
"A van will go out into a farm community and children can come there but they might only get one day a fortnight of a program.

Easter gifts may post disease risk: AQIS
The Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) is warning that Easter gifts from overseas, such as painted or blown eggs, could spread bird flu to humans and birds.
Carson Creagh from AQIS says the service will seize hundreds of "at risk" items this weekend including eggs, feathers and nests made of dried grapevines, and straw.
He says many come from Eastern Europe or the Mediterranean and could introduce bird flu, Newcastle disease or other viruses capable of devastating Australia's poultry industry.
"The obvious one is avian influenza which can be transmitted on eggs," he said.

Croc captured in Katherine main street
While the floodwaters are subsiding in the Northern Territory, it is taking longer to remove the visiting wildlife.
Last night, a metre-long freshwater crocodile was captured in the main street of Katherine
And at Mataranka Homestead, a hundred kilometres south, Deborah Moore says her place has become an ark.
"There's lots of kangaroos and peacocks and snakes and quite a few crocodiles around as well," she said.

Priority scheme in place for dwindling Q fever vaccine supplies
Meatworkers will be given priority access to the last remaining doses of Q fever vaccine to protect against the debilitating disease that is spread to human through contact with infected feral and domestic livestock.
This year's demand for the vaccine is expected to exceed current supplies, and fresh stocks cannot be produced until a new lab opens early next year.
Dr Rachel David, from CSL Pharmaceuticals, the only company in the world that makes Q Vax, has now set up a scheme to reduce the impact of the looming shortage.
"We've put in place a prioritisation system so that people involved directly in meat processing will be able to contact CSL and get access to the vaccine as a priority," she said.

Abattoirs given green light for halal beef exports to Malaysia
Three Australian abattoirs, one in Queensland and two in Victoria, have been given approval to send halal beef back into the Malaysian market.
Last August, Malaysia suspended beef imports from Australia due to concerns that slaughter methods do not meet Islamic standards.
The general manager of Norvic Foods, Jon Hayes, says approval was received to resume beef exports from the company's Wodonga abattoir after religious and technical auditors inspected the site.
"Malaysia is only taking a very small percentage of the Australian beef and it's another market that Australia needs," he said.
"We can't consume what we produce for 20 million people and we need the total global scene, and Malaysia is a very important market."

Shareholders vote not to rebuild Norply factory
The Kyogle community, on the New South Wales north coast, has had its worst fears confirmed with Norply Timbers deciding not to rebuild its factory after a fire last year.
Up until last September's devastating fire, the Norply factory employed about 140 people, making it one of the most significant employers in a town with a population of 4,000.
There were hopes that the company would eventually rebuild on its existing site but those have now been dashed.
Norply's 30 shareholders met earlier this week, when a majority voted to declare a dividend rather than rebuild the mill.

Little central Aust critter becoming a popular pet
It might not be the Easter bunny but a little critter from central Australia is proving a hit in the Top End.
The spinifex hopping mouse has become a popular pet in Katherine.
And as vet Sam McMahon explains, you cannot cuddle them, but with their big eyes, kangaroo legs, and basil brush tail, they are great to watch.
"They're a very interesting pet, they can live quite happily in you know a reasonable sort of set up," he said.
"And they're very interesting to watch. They dig holes, they dig tunnels, they bound around, they're quite interesting to sort of sit there and stare at.

Govt calls for Q fever vaccine tenders
The Federal Government has called for tenders to produce Q fever vaccine as supplies of the drug reach critically low levels.
Q fever is a debilitating disease which mainly affects meat and livestock workers, and is transmitted through infected animals.
Though the tender process should be completed by next month, the Government says it is unlikely a new supplier will be found in time to prevent a vaccine shortage.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran has criticised CSL for ending production and bulldozing the vaccine plant.
"The Government has called for expressions of interest for a tender to produce long term supplies of Q [fever] vaccine, it may well be that CSL will be a tenderer but there may be other companies as well," he said.

Key witness to front Cole inquiry
The Cole inquiry examining AWB's role in the oil-for-food scandal has been adjourned to a date to be fixed after hearing evidence last week from John Howard, Alexander Downer and Mark Vaile.
But there is at least one key witness still to come.
With public hearings all but finalised before Easter, senior counsel assisting John Agius informed Commissioner Terence Cole he would require him to sit again for several days after Anzac Day.
Mr Agius told the inquiry he was making arrangements for a witness to appear before the commission.
He later confirmed that witness to be Felicity Johnston, who worked for the UN's Office of Iraq program.
Mr Agius says the commission has obtained clearance from the United Nations but is still going through necessary protocols with the British Foreign Office.

Extreme weather events affecting rural commodities outlook
Cyclones and hurricanes continue to affect the outlook for rural commodities across mining, wheat and sugar markets.
The latest Commodity Price Index from the National Australia Bank is predicting a slight easing in rural prices over the next two years, with sugar, beef, wheat and cotton all expected to perform well.
Agribusiness economist Skye Dixon says extreme weather events have a big affect on rural prices.
"They do certainly have an impact because so much of rural commodity prices is derived from what's happening with supply," she said.

NSW drought worsens
New South Wales is slipping further back into drought, with 46 per cent of the State now drought declared.
That is up eight percentage points on last month.
Only 20 per cent New South Wales is considered satisfactory for rainfall.
But the State's Primary Industries Minister, Ian Macdonald, says despite worsening conditions, farmers are optimistic about a bigger winter crop than last year.
"The State needs widespread rain particularly in the north but also many areas in the south-west which are major cropping regions need a good downpour fairly quickly," he said.

Tomato plant virus spreading
There is confirmation today that the tomato yellow leaf curl virus is spreading in one of Australia's major production areas.
The virus stunts tomato growth and drastically limits yields.
Discovered for the first time in Australia a couple of weeks ago in Brisbane, it has now been identified on two commercial properties near Bundaberg.
Inspections are being planned in other Queensland tomato growing regions.
Chris Adriaansen from the Department of Primary Industries says it is proving difficult to trace the origin of the virus.
"This is what we're finding as we're going through all the properties that we're getting positive diagnosis on - there's no common linkage in terms they're not using the same supply of seedlings, they're not using the same supplier of anything, there's no other linkage," he said.

Protesters vow to continue gold mine protest
Environmentalists are continuing to picket a New South Wales gold mine over the use of cyanide, which they claim will permanently poison the local water supply.
The Lake Cowal open pit mine, in the state's central west, began processing recently but operations were shut down yesterday and a delivery of cyanide has reportedly been delayed.
Eight protesters have been charged with trespassing but Graham Dunstan from Cyanide Watch says the protest will continue until the mine is closed.
"This mining company has been granted water leases by the NSW Government to pump up 3,650 megalitres a year for this cyanide operation," he said.
"They leave this water behind permanently poisoned. Now in a time of drought giving people the equivalent of a Dubbo's water supply each year is profligate."

Search for grapevine genome moves a step closer
An Italian team of scientists has produced the world's first draft of the grapevine genome sequence.
The work, on the pinot noir variety, could lead to the development of high yielding, disease resistant grapes that still make good tasting wine.
Project leader with CSIRO Plant Industries, Doctor Mark Thomas, has been in close contact with the Italian team and says it is an important step towards the final grapevine gene map.
"Once the genome sequence is completed it will be the foundation I think for 21st century grape research as it will allow us to understand what genes are involved in grape quality and those genes that also control fruitfulness and yield," he said.
In Australia, the CSIRO has been working with a group in France trying to isolate the genes responsible for powdery mildew resistance and downey mildew resistance.

Growers satisfied with grape prices
Riverland grape growers who supply to wine giant McGuigan Simeon say they are satisfied with the fruit prices determined by an independent analyst.
The analyst was called in after a dispute arose over prices for grapes, many which had already been delivered to the winery.
Chris Byrne, from the Riverland Wine Grape Growers Association, says growers had been expecting to receive the lowest price.

Floodwaters affect search for banana prawns
Floodwaters and muddy river sediments are making it hard for trawlers in the Gulf of Carpentaria this season.
The banana prawn harvest began on Saturday, across the northern fishery.
Newfishing Australia's Steven Valentine says the fleet is being forced to use depth sounders to find the prawns.
"With the water clarity not being as it is - not very good, due to the mud slick - and we can't spot the mud boils, boats are having to rely heavily on their sounders, which means we don't cover the area quite so efficiently," he said.
"So it's been a pretty slow start to the season.
"Traditionally we road freight them out of Karumba. But, at the moment, with all the roads closed, we haven't got anywhere to send them to.
"Hopefully within the next four to five days, the rivers will drop enough so that the roads will be open and we can truck prawns out."
The Newfishing Australia fleet is hoping to catch up to 60 tonnes of banana prawns per trawler this season.

Bureaucracy to blame for closure, scallop fisher says
Tasmanian scallop fishers say they are fed up with a bureaucracy that has locked them out of the Bass Strait scallop fishery for the past six years.
Now the Federal Government says the fishery will remain closed for another three years.
Scallop fisherman Peter Stegmann says scientific advice showed a limited season was viable and blames overlapping Commonwealth and state fishing jurisdictions for the problem.
He says part of the $220 million earmarked for industry restructure should be spent sorting out the mess.

Study to focus on abalone habitat
A study on abalone habitat is about to get under way in south-west Victoria.
The information collected will be used to ensure the industry is managed sustainably.
Harry Peeters, from the Western Abalone Divers Association, says aerial imagery, sonar devices and underwater video will be used to help scientifically describe the seabed.
"Australia has one of the last sustainable wild catch abalone industries in the world," he said.
"Most of the others have been fished to extinction.

Nurseries to encourage kids to garden
The nursery industry is setting out to re-educate Australians about how to garden.
Market research has found gardening is losing market share from changing lifestyles, bigger houses, smaller gardens and a loss of skills.
The industry is fighting back and will soon launch a KidsGrow program, where local nurseries can work with schools to encourage children to garden.
Jenny Lambert, from the Nursery and Garden Industry Association, says gardening has social, educational and environmental benefits.
"The industry is concerned that the strength of the communities knowledge about gardening has dropped over the years and we're worried about where the next generation of gardeners is coming from," she said.

Global oil prices continue rising
Global oil prices continue to climb to record heights as Australia's grain growers prepare for this year's planting season.
Last night New York benchmark crude oil closed at more than $US70 a barrel for the first time in 23 years of trading.
Commodity analyst Tobin Gorey says running costs and fertiliser prices will rise further but there could be more demand for wheat and canola to make replacement biofuels.
"The costs are actually higher so people need to be compensating farmers and so on for producing it so it is profitable otherwise they won't stay in the business," he said.
"But the other side of that too is that demand for things like ethanol or biodiesel that creates further demand for oilseeds and grains as well.
"Perhaps that can also help boost the prices and is perhaps already influencing markets now to a small degree."
The combination of rising fuel and fertiliser costs is cause for concern for many farmers.
Graingrowers in South Australia's Mallee told Kerrie Lush cutting back on cropping is not an option and they are looking at other ways to reduce costs.
"We're certainly not cutting back on any acreage we're sowing but David's certainly going to try and do as much direct seeding without working up anything to save a bit of fuel that way," Val Gibbs from Wunkar said.
She says fertiliser prices are also far more expensive than last year.
"We have trialled putting zinc on through seed dressing instead of through fertiliser so that saves a bit of money that way."

Call for bureaucrat or MP to act as AWB 'moral conscience'
The Queensland Nationals are calling for changes at the top of AWB to help protect the single desk for wheat exports.
Member for Hinkler Paul Neville wants a bureaucrat or government MP on AWB's board to act as its "moral conscience" to stop future kickback controversies.
Mr Neville says the appointment would prevent questions over AWB's integrity if it retains the single desk.
"It's important that its probity be above any form of suspicion," he said.
"For that reason I'd be more comfortable if we had a government appointee or someone from the public service on that board."
Meanwhile tough international wheat marketing conditions have been reflected in AWB's first payment to growers from the 2005-06 national pool.
The dividend of just over $30 per metric tonne for Australian premium white (APW) grade wheat represents just 16 per cent of the total price growers can expect to receive.
Tony Smith from Plumgrove Commodity Trading says first payments are usually much higher but buyers are not prepared to pay higher grain prices.

Poppy grower contracts slashed
Pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline has slashed Tasmanian poppy grower contracts by 90 per cent.
Almost 500 poppy growers supply seed to the company with the lost contracts worth between $10 million and $12 million.
The company says there is a depression in world market prices and continuing oversupply.
Company researcher Dr Mike Doyle says the extraction plant will continue to run on existing stocks although the crop reduction will be for only one year.

Fruity fly precautions stall fruit, vege exports to Indonesia
Fruit and vegetable exports to Indonesia remain at a standstill, after the introduction of new import protocols to prevent an outbreak of fruit fly.
Exports of grapes, citrus, apples and pears are worth $35 million, but the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service says it has not issued any export permits on products affected by the new protocols, since they were imposed two weeks ago.
Australian growers say the conditions of spraying and inspection make exports to Indonesia uncommercial and is an effectively a ban on their produce.
A trade official was dispatched to Jakarta last week, and the Federal Government has now asked Indonesia to urgently revert to the previous import protocol.

Federal Govt funds target sugar industry
The Federal Government has handed over $36 million in the latest round of sugar industry reform.
Bundaberg Sugar will build a fertiliser production plant at its Tableland Mill, while the Proserpine Cooperative Sugar Milling Association will construct a plant to make a chemical from a cane by-product.

WA bananas sent east
A small number of Western Australian bananas have been sent to the eastern states after a sharp drop in demand.
After cyclone Larry destroyed the Queensland crop, WA growers vowed to stay loyal to their local customers.
But with bananas selling for about $6 a kilogram, shoppers decided to leave fruit on the shelf.
Kevin Leahy from Carnarvon's Sweeter Banana Co-operative says sending fruit east will not become a regular practice.
"A lot of bananas came in from Queensland that had come down obviously with the cyclone, they cleaned them up and sent them over and there was no demand," he said.

Push on for higher capital gains tax threshold
There are calls for the capital gains tax (CGT) threshold to be lifted to at least $10 million to protect farmers.
Combined assets worth more than $5 million mean farmers cannot access small business concessions on the tax.
It is starting to hit farm families when they try to expand, relocate or retire, because of rising property prices.
South Australian accountant Peter Hayes is part of a group that is lobbying federal politicians to increase the threshold, which has not changed for seven years.
"One client of mine wanted to relocate and their combined assets were in the order of $6 million, so they didn't comply with the CGT small business threshold and for them to move was going to cost them $1 million in tax," he said.

Canada records 5th mad cow case
Canada has confirmed its fifth case of mad cow disease.
But it is unlikely to cause further trade restrictions with the United States.
US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns says he expects no change in imports of Canadian beef and cattle under 30 months, after mad cow disease showed up in a six-year-old British Columbia dairy cow.
But Greg Doud, with the National Cattlemen's Beef Association, says based on the cow's age there is a concern over the effectiveness of Canada's ban on feeding cow parts to cows, thought to spread the disease.
"Having the second animal that seems to be after the feed ban went into place in August of 1997... does seem to suggest that there is a feed ban compliance issue," he said.
The US resumed imports of younger Canadian animals and their meat last year, but still prohibits trade in older ones.

Mutton making comeback in UK
If you thought mutton was a cut of meat that went out with the war years and the depression, think again.
Sheep producers in the UK have started a Mutton Renaissance Club to improve mutton's image, which could increase Australia's already booming export market.
John Thorley from the UK National Sheep Association says they have had a lot of help from their high profile patron.
"Most people had given up on mutton a long, long time ago and then one or two people, his Royal Highness Prince Charles particularly, decided it was time we moved this thing on a bit," he said.

