That money will fund projects like salt interception schemes, fishways, local and weir upgrades, and possibly buying water from farmers.
South Australian River Murray Minister Karlene Maywald says the money has been desperately needed.
"Projects were underfunded, the Murray Darling Basin Commission was underfunded, our projects that we all agreed to from a jurisdictional point of view were all starting to slip and it looked like we were never going to achieve what we needed to do to save the River Murray," she said.

Budget boosts funding for illegal fishing fight
The Federal Government has announced a big crack down on illegal fishing in Australia's northern waters.
The $389 million package is designed to double the number of boats apprehended each year through increased surveillance and patrols, along with improved boat-burning facilities to destroy illegal fishing boats.
Indigenous coastal rangers will also be employed as part of the plan but Gary Ward from the Gulf of Carpentaria Commercial Fishermen's Association says the money is being used in the wrong way.
"Spending this money on Aboriginal communities is very fine but you're talking about a radius of probably 25 kilometres each side of the community," he said.
"Now these boats range widely over the Gulf of Carpentaria, we need more surveillance but we need more active now, the fishing fraternity in the Gulf of Carpentaria that's worked so hard for a sustainable and viable fishery has been left out in the lurch."

Plan unveiled to secure veg industry future
A new $3 million strategy to secure the future of the vegetable industry has been unveiled in Brisbane this morning.
VegVision 2020 is the product of months of talks between growers, the Federal Government, supermarkets and food processors.
It is a $3 million plan with a very simple message - how to lift the industry's growth from an unsustainable 3 per cent by getting more vegetables on consumers' plates.
Fair Dinkum Food Campaigner Richard Bovill is a member of the Australian Vegetable Industry Development Group and says growers must work with retailers and processors if they are to secure their future.
"There are adversarial issues out there, there will always be competitive pressures but we also have to understand our common goals and work together with those," he said.
"I think we can look to a range of different industry models and we shouldn't just look at vegetables and the horticultural sector."

US Farm Bill debate begins
The battle has started early in Washington over the next US Farm Bill, due to be drafted next year.
The White House and Congress do not see eye to eye on farm policy.
While US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns and the White House are calling for sweeping changes in US farm policy, lawmakers are defending the status quo.
Top Democrat on the House Agriculture Committee Collin Peterson told a farm bill field hearing in Texas, US agriculture should not be singled out for cuts.
"This budget talk irritates me a little bit because agriculture did not cause these budget problems. And I do not agree that we ought to be the ones that have to pay the price because we've actually saved money," he said.

Row erupts between Grains Council and Agriculture Minister
A rift has emerged between Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran and Australia's peak grain lobby.
The Grains Council is outraged that the oil-for-food inquiry is being used as an excuse to backflip on plans to reduce a key levy for the Wheat Export Authority.
The council wanted the industry levy reduced from 22 cents a tonne to 19, leaving the authority with a million dollar cash surplus.
Spokesman David Ginns says the surplus will now be doubled and has accused Mr McGauran of ignoring growers.
"There have been a number of matters that we've raised with him where he hasn't taken the advice of the key industry body and we are concerned that our batting average is not particularly good at the moment and we seem to be getting some excuses back at the moment," he said.
But in an unprecedented attack on a peak commodity council, Mr McGauran has accused the Grains Council of acting dishonourably and not working in the best interests of growers.
Mr McGauran says the council has also deliberately leaked confidential ministerial documents and spread misinformation.
"I believe this is an ill-considered and ill-timed intervention by the Grains Council which is more puzzling than anything else," he said.

Saltbush shrubland plan angers graziers
Graziers in western New South Wales are furious about a proposal to list old man saltbush shrubland as endangered.
The New South Wales Scientific Committee has found saltbush shrubland has fallen by 70 per cent since European settlement and the rest is at risk of extinction from clearing and grazing.
But Graham Morphett, who has a property north-west of Hay, says the plant is thriving in the western division due to good management and rabbit control.
"I've got 170,000 acres out here and I have tens of thousands of acres of old man saltbush with up to 5,000 acre stands," he said.

Calls to scrap WET tax
The Western Australian wine industry wants the Wine Equalisation Tax (WET) abolished despite a big Budget boost.
The Federal Government has increased tax rebates to smaller wine producers by $210,000.
They are available to producers with up to $1.7 million in sales.
But Ron Fraser from the Margaret River Wine Association says it is band-aid therapy, which is lulling smaller producers into a false sense of security
"It's avoiding the issue that the WET tax is an impost on the cost of wine and should be scrapped altogether," he said.
"The only way that you can get the benefits from this extra threshold is to increase your sales and in today's market to increase your sales is an increasingly difficult job.

Grape growers mull mothballing vines
Grape growers in South Australia's Riverland are considering mothballing their vines, hoping to ride out the industry's oversupply.
Many local growers could not sell their fruit this year, with wineries suspending or not renewing contracts.
With no relief in sight, growers say they could prune heavily or use chemicals to hinder fruit growth to hibernate vines instead of having to pull them out.
Berri grape grower Bill Ruediger says he will have to make a decision very soon.

ACCC to investigate Sunbeam price-setting
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) will investigate whether dried fruit processor Sunbeam Foods breached the Trade Practices Act in setting low prices this season.
ACCC Commissioner John Martin held talks with growers in Mildura in north-west Victoria this week after the Victorian Farmers Federation lodged complaints of unconscionable conduct by the industry's major processor.
Growers claim Sunbeam is taking advantage of its virtual monopoly position in the industry, and has set prices at a 20-year low.

Rural property values tipped to even out
Rural property values have doubled and in some cases tripled in just four years, outperforming most other capital investments.
But they could be about to come off the boil.
Wayne Carlson from the National Australia Bank says prices are expected to even out in the next 12 to 24 months.
"We probably don't really expect prices to come down," he said.
"We expect more a plateau effect.
"These may be some discount in the lower, standard and marginal type lends. And there's no doubt the trend of this off-farm investment super funds, managed investment schemes et cetera will continue to tip money into this market.

Plantation tax reform plans unveiled
The Federal Government has unveiled proposed changes to tax incentives for investors in the plantation timber sector.
The incentives, which currently provide 100 per cent tax deductions for managed investment schemes, have been under review for the past 12 months.
Dr Judy Clark, from the Australian National University (ANU), says the draft changes which will affect investor interest.
"Putting a cap on the immediate volume of money that can be tax deducted and you also add on that reduction in top marginal tax rat from 47 to 45 per cent, both of these work to down play the attractiveness of these schemes for investors," she said.
"We don't need to plant more softwood to meet Australia's entire timber needs.

Marine park boundaries 'botched'
The Marine Conservation Society (MCS) wants changes to the way boundaries are established for national marine parks.
It says the new park between Tasmania and the mainland is a botched job, which fails to protect marine biodiversity.
The park's boundaries were redrawn after concerns from the fishing sector.
The MCS's Craig Bohm says the revised boundaries have missed biodiverisity hotspots, and the Federal Government must review the process.

G-G heads up Birdsville Track
Governor-General Michael Jeffrey has embarked on a journey up the Birdsville Track to attract attention to life in the outback.
Accompanied by his valet, doctor, physio and other escorts, the Governor-General will spend five days meeting people from remote communities as part of the Year of the Outback.
Major-General Jeffrey hopes the trip will inspire others.
"I hope to expose the characters the lifestyle, some of the difficulties of course," he said.

Leaping croc shocks scientists
An airborne four-metre crocodile has made scientists' hearts skip a beat during research on the Ord River in the far north of Western Australia.
Scientists had been using an electrical current to temporarily stun fish, so as to study them.
But they accidentally sent a shock wave through a nearby crocodile.
Scott Goodson from the Department of Environment says the jumping croc gave everyone a start.
"He breached the water, he got a metre out of the water, that's a big croc!" he said.
"He got a fairly good tickle up, I would have thought!"
Mr Goodson says the reptile is probably just a bit stunned after the accidental shock treatment.
"He's probably taken off and just kicking back behind another rock, I don't think he will come too close to that boat again," he said.

AWB hopes to salvage India wheat deal
Wheat exporter AWB hopes last minute talks can salvage a half million tonne wheat deal with India.
Indian authorities have raised new concerns about quality issues, this time with wheat which has not even left Australia.
The first consignment of wheat under the deal was held up last week while tests for pesticide contamination were carried out. Those tests cleared the wheat for unloading.
National pool manager with AWB David Johnson says the company is trying to limit the damage to growers, with the national pool bearing any cost of delays.
"We are looking to mitigate an exposure, cost to growers, by potentially diverting some of those vessels to other markets," he said.

Cole inquiry hears from ex-UN customs official
The Cole inquiry has reconvened in Sydney to hear the evidence of former UN customs official Felicity Johnston.
Ms Johnston has told the inquiry she informed Australian Government officials in both Washington and New York about inland transport fees being paid by AWB to the Iraqi Government.
Ms Johnston appeared at the inquiry via video link from Washington.
She told senior counsel assisting John Agius she mentioned the inland transportation payments in discussion with DFAT's delegate at the Australian mission to the UN, Bronte Moules and with AusTrade Commissioner Alistair Nicholas.
Ms Johnston said she raised the issue in January and March 2000 following a complaint from the Canadians.

Govt accused of using Budget to shore up Nationals' vote
The Federal Government has attacked Labor's plans for a national high-speed broadband network, accusing it of allocating rural telecommunications money to the cities.
But Labor leader Kim Beazley has used his Budget reply speech to criticise the Government for basing roads spending on shoring up National party votes.
Mr Beazley says Labor would provide free Tafe for traditional trades, more childcare places across Australia and put a stop to importing foreign apprentices.
He also criticised the Government for failing to invest in climate change research, do more to tackle water shortages and laid down plans to provide all businesses and households with fast Internet.
"To you and me this means a broadband system 25 times faster than the sorts of speeds available in Australia today," he said.
But the Government says Labor plans to spend $2 billion earmarked for rural telecommunications to fund broadband in the city.
And National Farmers Federation president Peter Corish says money Labor wants for its plans is already being spent.

Heemskirk wind farm mothballed
The Federal Government's decision not to increase renewable energy targets is being blamed for a decision to mothball Tasmania's $300 million Heemskirk wind farm.
Tasmanian energy company Roaring 40s says it remains committed to existing Australian projects but will be wind back work on new developments.
Managing director Mark Kelleher says there are no incentives for electricity retailers to buy wind energy, making Heemskirk unviable.

Controls on explosive chemicals sales to be tightened
The Queensland Government is further tightening controls on the sale of explosive chemicals after the arrest of a Brisbane man found to be in the possession of 53 kilograms of explosives.
The Government will meet with farm and mining groups in Brisbane today to discuss the implications of the new controls.
Police allege a Brisbane high school teacher illegally purchased the explosive Powergel from chemical company Orica under the pretense of using it for movie stunts.
The 40-year-old is expected to be the first Queenslander charged with terrorism.
The Queensland Government has announced sellers of chemicals, like ammonium nitrate used by farmers, will need to report fortnightly to the Government on who they sell explosive materials to and even call the Department of Natural Resources to double-check the details of new and existing customers.

NQ wildlife to benefit from grape glut
Grape growers are having trouble getting rid of their fruit this year, but one solution has been to send it to north Queensland, to feed hungry wildlife.
With habitat destroyed by cyclone Larry, surplus grapes from Lopresti Wines in South Australia are being fed to birds like the Southern Cassowary.
Scott Sullivan from Queensland's Parks and Wildlife Service, says they are happy to get them.

Cape calls for cyclone assistance
Graziers, tourism operators and Indigenous communities on Cape York are calling for immediate financial help from the Federal Government in the wake of Cyclone Monica.
The cyclone brought heavy rain and severe flooding to the cape, and graziers say there been widespread damage to roads, and huge stock losses.
The Cape communities want to know why they cannot access the same assistance offered to victims of cyclone Larry.
Cape grazier Darcy Burns says they are desperate.
"It looks like Larry's got everything," he said.
"We're not hearing one word on Monica, I think people have forgotten how much damage that's done up there.
"We understand fully about Innisfail's done and they need all the support they can get, we're not knocking that at all, but they've also got to look at us as well, there's people up there at the moment, we've lost our income for the next 12 months because we can't get in there, and the season's so short now."

WA farmers unhappy with state Budget
The Western Australian Government has handed down its budget, but it has failed to excite the agricultural sector.
The Government has confirmed a surplus of $2 billion for this financial year, with the windfall to pay for the Perth to Mandurah railway.
Trevor de Landgraft from the WA Farmers Federation says rural people have been ignored.

Rural jobs hard to fill: survey
A joint federal and Victorian government survey suggests one third of rural employers cannot fill job vacancies.
The survey of the Wimmera Grampians region is being rolled out across the state, with the results to be compared with other states and territories.
Penny Ireland, from the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations, says professional and trade positions in health, finance and construction are the hardest to fill.
"There were a lot of health related professional occupations so general practitioner, registered nurses, occupational therapists, physiotherapists. There was also a number of trades positions, in particular motor mechanics, which we see across the country and electricians," she said.
Meanwhile, grey nomads are being used to temporarily fill some of the shortages in central Australia.
Under the Outback Links program, retired travellers are helping to fix the plumbing, or mind children on outback stations , in exchange for a taste of remote living.
Gold Coast retiree Bobbie Perkins is the first volunteer to be placed, and says helping with the housework on New Crown Station, south of Alice Springs, is actually a good way to learn about rural Australia.

Biosecurity plan to protect northern WA
Australia's first regional biosecurity plan is being launched today in Kununurra, in the far north of Western Australia.
Ord Guard will educate groups from local Indigenous communities to travellers, on plant disease threats and prevention in the Ord River region.
With up to 120,000 visitors passing through each year, Dr Simon Mckirdie from the CRC for Plant Biosecurity, says educating tourists is a key part of the plan,

Seafood lovers to feel the pinch on crab prices
Commercial crab fishermen in the Northern Territory say they are potting just over half the number of crabs they used to, because of new catch size rules.
The minimum catch size of both female and male mud crabs has increased by a centimetre, but anglers say there are not many around at this time of year.
Melbourne seafood wholesaler, Spencer Wilkinson says diners could be wrestling bigger crabs on the dinner plate in the future, if they can afford them.
"It will just price itself out of the market and what happens is, when it gets to exorbitant levels, the Sydney market soaks up basically all the crab," he said.

Govt tight-lipped on Snowy Hydro sale
The New South Wales Government has confirmed an international offer for Snowy Hydro, but says it needs to keep tight-lipped on the details.
State Finance Minister John Della Bosca said yesterday any discussion of detail before the release of the prospectus would incur the risk of litigation.
But Lester Wheatly, chair of the Murray Valley Community Action group, says it is just an excuse to keep the public in the dark.
"The Government attitude is that "look here, we're involved in very sensitive international negotiations at the moment and can't tell you anything". At the end of the day, that's just not good enough.

Two in running for peak farm job
Australia's top job in agripolitics will be contested for the first time in four years, with Peter Corish set to step down as president of the National Farmers Federation.
NFF trade representative Allan Burgess and former Meat and Livestock Australia chairman David Crombie have nominated for the key post.
Mr Corish will not comment on speculation he will contest the seat of Gwydir in the next election, which will be vacated by former deputy prime minister John Anderson.
He says water reform and more money for rural telecommunications have been major achievements during his presidency.
"The National Water Initiative I think is a key opportunity that we've locked in while I've been NFF president," he said.
"We've made significant progress in the area of workplace reform, we have locked in significant funding for rural Australia in regard to telecommunications, and I've enjoyed my time immensely over the four years."
Board elections will be held at the next NFF annual general meeting on June 14 and 15.
Meanwhile former executive director of the NFF, Rick Farley has died.
Mr Farley was making a slow recovery after a stroke, but died from injuries he received after falling from a wheelchair outside Sydney's Balmain Hospital at the weekend.
In the mid-70s Rick Farley became the first executive director of the newly formed Cattlemen's Union (CU) in Queensland.
With a background in the arts, time spent in the hippy capital of Nimbin and a job with Labor health spokesperson Doug Everingham, Mr Farley was not an obvous choice to head up the organisation, most of whose members were staunch National Party supporters.
But from his days in Rockhampton with the CU, the farmers' rally in 1985 in Canberra, the foundation of the Landcare moverment in the late 80s and then the native title debate in the 90s Rick Farley was a smart political operator, In Canberra he cut a distinctive character in moleskins, boots and Akubra and as Cattlemen's first preisident Sir Grahman McCamley says he was an extremely effective lobbyist on behalf of the farm sector.

Vaile leaves door ajar for Katter
Leader of the National Party Mark Vaile says he would push for another ministry position if Queensland Independent Bob Katter rejoined the party.
There is speculation Mr Katter will seek membership of the Nationals, after contesting the last election in his seat of Kennedy as an Independent.
The Nationals lost a ministry position earlier this year when Senator Julian McGauran crossed to the Liberal Party.
Mr Vaile has told the Nine Network he is keeping an open mind about Mr Katter.
"Politics is about numbers and if someone wants to commit to the ideals and the philosophies of our particular party or our government then they're most welcome, so I'd keep an open mind on that particular matter," he said.

Opponents speak out against Qld dam proposal
More than 3,000 people attended a weekend protest rally in the Queensland city of Gympie, to fight the proposed Mary River Dam.
The State Government is planning a 660,000 megalitre dam at Traveston Crossing, south of the city, to supply the water needs of Brisbane and the Sunshine Coast.
The Government made its first property acquisition late last week, only days after announcing a $50 million package to begin the buyback process.
Local mayors, a federal member of parliament, conservationists and landholders addressed the public meeting.
Farmer Ian Allen says a fighting fund has also been established.
"My farm is affected as much anyone else's," he said.
"I've spent a long time getting where I want to get, I just felt like I'm there, and this announcement of a dam has put me back where I started 20-30 years ago.

Lamb production springs to new high
Australian lamb production hit a new record during the first three months of 2006, despite challenging seasonal conditions.
Meat and Livestock Australia says the average jump of 8 per cent came as a surprise, with the biggest gains in Victoria and WA, where there is a continuing shift away from growing wool.
Despite the growing stock numbers, exports are up and prices remain just 10 per cent under the all-time highs.
Grazier Peter Small from Victoria's western district, says it breaks his heart to turn away from wool, but there is a lot more money to be made out of lamb.
"Well it is what we have done but we are reluctant to do it," he said.

Farmers log on to livestock sales
Rising fuel costs and more user-friendly technology are said to be driving a jump in the number of farmers selling livestock over the Internet.
Elders sells around 3 per cent of Australia's sheep, lambs and cattle in online auctions.
Jack Gleeson from Elders says it is saving farmers the cost of trucking livestock to saleyards.
"Normally there would be freight involved from the point of origin, the vendor's property to the saleyard," he said.

Big drop in US wheat production tipped
The US Agriculture Department is tipping an 11 per cent drop in wheat production there over the next 12 months.
The latest forecast is for a total harvest in 2006-07 of $1.8 billion bushels.
USDA World Agriculture Outlook Board Chairman Gerald Bange blames chronic drought and tough competition from Australia and Canada for lower exports.
"We're looking at exports, beginning June 1 at about 900 million bushels, which would be about 100 million bushels lower than we will export in the 2005/06 year, which is currently estimated at an even 1 billion bushels," he said.
Mr Bange says part of the reason is a stronger US price forecast in '06/'07 due to lower production and tighter ending stocks.
Wheat prices look set to improve on the back of the USDA report, which has also revealed a substantial increase in corn exports.
There is also higher domestic demand in the US for corn to make ethanol.
Natham Omodei from commodity trader Plum Grove, says that should make wheat more attractive as feed for livestock and drive up prices.
"They increased use for ethanol production, which really cut their stock forecasts for 2006-2007," he said.

NSW Govt announces department restructure
The New South Wales Government has announced a major restructure of the Department of Natural Resources in a bid to save $16 million a year.
Fifty employees are being moved from Sydney to Orange, and voluntary redundancies are being offered for non-frontline staff.
Farmers are also worried about a decision to scrap regional director positions.
But Jeff Angel from the Total Environment Centre says the changes will speed up reform.
"You're not going to get the unbelievable and untrustworthy level of inconsistent decision-making that we had under the previous system," he said.
"You can go way too far in having autonomous regions.

Fly slows weed threat in Timor
A natural predator is slowing the spread of the world's worst weed across our northern neighbours.
The stem galling fly has been introduced across East and West Timor, to control siam weed.
Researcher Rob Williams says the Australian-funded project also reduces the chance of the weed gaining a foothold in the Northern Territory.
"Siam weed can be seen in 90 per cent of the countryside in East Timor, and it covers the grasslands," he said.
The (stem) gall flies are re-producing here. They released 200 gall flies here last year. The gall flies survived through the dry season and are growing here now.

Tassie farmer recognised by vege industry
A Tasmanian potato farmer has been named the Young Vegetable Grower of the Year, for his leadership during the Fair Dinkum Food campaign.
Matthew Ryan from northern Tasmania was honoured at the national conference of AusVeg in Brisbane at the weekend.
He says the campaign raised the profile of the vegetable industry, but there is still more to be done.

Royal Flying Doctor Service turns 78
The Royal Flying Doctor Service (RFDS) is celebrating its 78th birthday today.
Reverend John Flynn established the Flying Doctors at Cloncurry in north-west Queensland back in 1928.
Senior flight nurse at the Mount Isa base, Mary Noon, says the RFDS has come a long way since then, but still plays an essential role in remote areas.
"One day you can be delivering a baby, and the next day you're helping somebody with chest pain, so it's a huge variation," she said.
"You get to meet such a variety of people, you get to see new places, different places every day as opposed to the ward.

Mining losses a correction, say analysts
The mining sector has had a rough couple of days, with metal prices falling sharply on the commodity markets overnight.
Copper was the biggest loser, at one stage falling 9 per cent, with gold down 4 per cent, and silver 5 per cent.
But analysts say it is not a global market meltdown, merely a long overdue correction on the minerals boom.
Malcolm Condie, from AWB Landmark, says the mining sector has taken the biggest battering, and agricultural commodities should escape relatively unscathed.
He says the fundamentals for wool prices are unchanged, the poor US crop has strengthened wheat prices and demand from Asia and India for other agricultural commodities will continue to strengthen.
"I don't see any further risk or downside risk for wool at this stage," he said.
"We might see the market just tread water for a little while now.
"Obviously grain, wheat is on a bit of an upward spiral and I mean generally there is no correlation between those and the other mineral commodities that we export. But obviously as far as food stuffs go people have to eat and I think we are going to see a lot more going into Asia."
Rising inflation fears in the US have largely contributed to the weaker commodity prices.
The All Ordinaries Index had fallen 93 points at the close of trade yesterday, with bulk-commodity companies like BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto the hardest hit.
Chris Monroe of Hartleys says it was the correction the market, "had to have."
"Another cliche, the market was, "priced to perfection" I think," he said.

NFF contender seeks to build trust between cities and bush
The man widely tipped to be the next head of the National Farmers Federation (NFF) says his main priority will be rebuilding trust between urban and country areas.
The former chairman of Meat and Livestock Australia David Crombie, has been asked to run for the NFF presidency by two state farming groups.
He says farmers need the support of city people to defeat extreme animal rights groups, which he says is a key issue for Australian agriculture.
Mr Crombie, who lives in Brisbane, says he is not a typical farmer, but does not think that stops him being an effective leader of Australia's most powerful rural lobby group.
"No, I'm certainly not an average farmer because I currently live in Brisbane, but certainly my interests are in agriculture and all of my professional life I've been involved in agriculture. I believe I have something to offer. I believe I can make a difference," he said.

NSW farmers chief quits
The chief executive of the New South Wales Farmers Association has resigned, effective immediately.
Dr Ray Johnson has completed only two years of his three year contract, but the association will not say whether he will be paid out.
President Jock Laurie rejects suggestions the former chief executive was pushed by a divided board.

Cool reaction to Qld water plan
The Queensland Government is looking to buy two large cotton properties in the state's south-west to return water to the Murray-Darling Basin.
The buy-up is expected to cost up to $60 million and deliver 58,000 megalitres of water a year over the New South Wales border.
The Federal Government rejected a similar proposal four years ago to purchase the huge Cubbie Station.
Grazier Pot Peterson is among New South Wales landholders who have been critical of the amount of water Queensland irrigators take out of the Condamine-Balonne river system, and says this plan will not be very beneficial.
"I'm not saying that they shouldn't purchase it, but I just think it would be far more beneficial if they purchased something upstream that would have a big affect on us, because really the water virtually stops at Cubbie," he said.
"As we saw in the 2004 flood they did have a big flood at St George but we didn't get any of it here."
The plan will be out to the Murray-Darling Ministerial Council meeting in Melbourne on Friday.
Meanwhile the Cubbie Group, which runs Cubbie Station, has slammed calls by the New South Wales Government for its water allocation to be reduced.
The station can store 500,000 megalitres of water for its cotton-growing operation, and graziers south of the border complain they are being starved of crucial flood water flows.
But joint managing director John Grabbe says New South Wales should fix up evaporation losses in the Menindee Lakes in the state's west, before attacking Queensland's science-based water allocations.
"Oh get your own house in order, but let's be fair dinkum, not just throw stones at each other, but let's be fair dinkum," he said.
"I mean, water is too valuable a resource to be going up into the air in shallow storage systems. Now we don't do it at Cubbie, and I implore the southern states to seriously look at their storage systems.
Federal Agricultural Minister Peter McGauran says the CSIRO is scare-mongering, with a report calling for bigger environmental flows for the Murray River.
An extra 500 gigalitres has already been committed to the Murray, but the scientific body says up to five times more will be needed to restore the river's health.
Despite criticising that finding, Mr McGauran acknowledges progress has been slow on the Living Murray Initiative, and says the report will be considered.

Eldest children not always the best farm managers: research
New research has shown the tradition of passing the farm onto the eldest child could be costing the sector its best talent.
Psychologist and social researcher, Dr Ian Ploughman, says by nature, older children are more conservative.
He says younger siblings tend to be the most innovative and creative, but do not have the opportunity to contribute.
"The younger brothers and sisters commonly have less interest in staying on the farm, and are more creative and more mobile," he said.

Debt an obstacle to wool merger
The wool industry remains committed to a merger between its promotion and research arms, despite a dispute over a $27 million debt.
Australian Wool Services, which owns the Woolmark brand, is seeking financial help from the Federal Government to pay the debt, without success.
The owed money relates to a pension fund for former UK-based employees.
Chairman of Australian Wool Innovation Ian McLachlan says he understands the Government's position, but there will not be a merger between the two companies until the bill is paid.
"I've been in government and I think when a government has a position, it has to repeat that position, and it will hold that position until somebody comes up with a really bright idea as to how we can solve it," he said.

AWB searches for new market for stranded wheat
Wheat exporter AWB says it is trying to find another market for a shipment of wheat stranded at Geraldton in Western Australia, due to a quarantine dispute with India.
The ship has been docked for a month, while talks have been under way to resolve the problem.
The ship is expected to be loaded today.
Paul Ryan, AWB's industry relations manager in WA, says two other vessels have been unloaded successfully in India, but he cannot say why this vessel has been in port for so long.
"It is more to do with a range of quarantine restrictions, in terms of bringing wheat into India," he said.

WA exercise to test response to foot and mouth outbreak
An operation dubbed "Exercise Wild West" starts today in Western Australia to test the ability of authorities to fight a foot and mouth disease outbreak.
The simulated exercise will run until Friday, and involves 180 people from the Department of Agriculture and Food and other agencies.
Director of Animal Biosecurity Ashley Mercy says an outbreak in Australia similar to the 2001 United Kingdom outbreak would cost the Australian economy about $15 billion.

Northern growers put price cap on bananas
It is pretty rare for producers to knock back money, but with soaring prices a small group of north Queensland banana growers have decided to put a price cap on their fruit.
Pacific Coast Eco Bananas, which won an award last night for farming in an environmentally sustainable manner, says sustainability needs to apply to all sectors of the business.
In the wake of cyclone Larry some bananas have sold for more than $100 a carton, but the company's Dianne Sciacca says that level cannot be sustained, with the price cap set at $70.
"I think if you're serious about sustainability, you have to live within a sustainable business environment as well and we ask a premium price for our product of which that is supported by the supermarkets and our customers in the market place," she said.

Scientists consider climate change challenges
Scientists are meeting in Sydney today to tackle climate change.
The scientists from CSIRO, the Bureau of Meteorology and the Greenhouse Office are debating strategies they say need to be implemented to adapt to the changing climate.
Principal scientist with the CSIRO, Kevin Hennessy says it is likely farmers will be forced to make big changes.
"We would need to look at improving water use efficiency, water recycling, so reduce the amount of evaporation from some of our irrigation channels, and smarter ways of farming, for example direct drilling of seeds, retaining the stubble to reduce both erosion and water usage, and I guess some challenges for the types of crops that we use," he said.

Land use bid concerns fishing industry
Members of the aquaculture and fishing industries on South Australia's Eyre Peninsula say they are worried about the possible impact of Aboriginal claims over the region's coastal waters.
Negotiations have begun for Indigenous Land Use Agreements (ILUA), covering coastal land and waters from Cowell to Venus Bay.
Michael Whillas from the Seafood Council of South Australia says because the process is new, there are uncertainties about the future legal status of aquaculture leases and fishing rights.
"The problem that we face is that under the Native Title Act, a native title claim is extinguished when there is an existing licence or lease," he said.
"Under the ILUA, that doesn't necessarily happen. At this stage, there are some grey areas.

Group opposes giving national parks back to traditional owners
A campaign to prevent 17 national parks being returned to their traditional owners has stepped up in the Northern Territory.
The Territory Government intends to hand over the land title to traditional Indigenous owners, and then lease it back for 99 years under a joint management plan.
With plans to circulate petitions, Save Our Parks campaigner Francoises Builder says there is plenty of opposition to any single group owning parks.
"Parks are free, they are for everybody, so why handing it to a group of people and then leasing it back with taxpayers' money for a million dollars a year?"
"And it is true when you are giving away for example Bondi Beach it's exactly the same thing, we have nothing else to go to."

Infrastructure costs hold up Ord irrigation scheme
Infrastructure costs are the latest hurdle for expansion plans in the nation's biggest irrigation scheme, in Western Australia's far north.
Native title settlement last October raised hopes of a quick go-ahead for Ord Stage 2 but six months on there is still no movement.
The scheme would more than double the existing irrigation area in WA, with more than 30,000 hectares earmarked for development.
WA's Minister for Agriculture and Food Kim Chance says a decision is imminent, but it is a matter of deciding how much should be paid for roads, power and irrigation works.

WA to reap rewards after Brazil iron deal
Western Australia's economy looks set for further growth, with Brazil, the world's largest iron ore producer, negotiating a better-than-expected price hike.
The market had tipped a rise in the iron ore price of between 10 and 15 per cent, instead, it will go up 19 per cent.
The deal between Brazil's CVRD and German steel-maker ThyssenKrupp sets the scene for increased iron prices for WA miners.
ANZ Bank commodity analyst Andrew Harrington says it also means more royalties for government coffers.
"The higher the price the higher the volume, will inevitably lead to higher tax revenues for the Government," he said.
"Earlier in the year ABARE was forecasting that iron ore would become the highest exporter earner for the country.

Tasmania set for rail upgrade
Toll's successful takeover of transport company Patrick has paved the way for a multi-million dollar rail upgrade in Tasmania.
Pacific National, which is jointly owned by the two companies, threatened to stop carting container freight by rail last year, unless state and federal governments helped to improve infrastructure.
After months of stalled negotiations, Pacific National has now agreed to invest $38 million in new rolling stock, while the governments will provide $118 million for infrastructure.
Tasmanian Minister for Infrastructure Jim Cox hopes industry will also support a better rail service.

Draft dairy report recommends support for GM crops
The dairy industry has been embarrassed by the leaking of a draft report that recommends it join other agricultural industries in supporting genetically modified (GM) crops.
Until now state governments have had the backing of the dairy industry in banning commercial GM crops.
The draft report was commissioned by the Australian Dairy Industry Council (ADIC) and was not due to be released until much later this year.
Policy director with Australian Dairy Farmers, Robert Poole, says the current policy was written seven years ago, and was due for review.
"Had we not had it happen where it's now become public we would have certainly gone to the point where we would have consulted widely especially with dairy farmers and with dairy companies, although they're part of the ADIC process and obviously ultimately governments as well," he said.
Mr Poole says it is a draft report and not industry policy.
Meanwhile a leading plant breeder says the dairy industry would save millions of dollars, if it embraced GM crops.
Viruses in pastures such as white clover cost the industry $110 million a year, but a virus-resistant clover could be on-farm by 2009.
Research director Professor German Spangenberg says that is just one reason for introducing genetically modified technology.

Bush sees no need for US inquiry into AWB
President George W Bush does not appear to think there will be need for a US inquiry into AWB, despite pressure from domestic farm groups and some senators.
The President has expressed confident in the Australian Government's ability to investigate the kickbacks scandal, during a visit to Washington by Prime Minister John Howard.
Mr Bush praised Howard for his free trade efforts, and dodged questions about the AWB, saying Australia was conducting its own investigation into the UN oil-for-food scandal, and Mr Bush looked forward to seeing the results.
At the US Capitol, Mr Howard told Senate leaders he understood the difficulty surrounding the Australia-US free trade agreement.
"I know that things of that kind always create some difficult domestic judgments and considerations ... and, I'm very grateful that it received such strong support," he said.

Court rules against AWB over 'apology' document
A Federal Court judge has ruled against wheat exporter AWB, in its fight to keep a so-called apology document confidential.
The document was prepared on the advice of US-based public relations consultant, and was mistakenly included in evidence AWB tendered to the Cole inquiry.
Justice Neil Young took just 10 minutes to rule, AWB had no claim for legal professional privilege, and rejected the company's efforts to keep the document confidential.
Justice Young also found Commissioner Cole had every right to rule on the legal status of the document, a point disputed by AWB.

Burgess makes case to lead NFF
No surprises and no big policy changes is how prospective National Farmers' Federation (NFF) boss Allan Burgess, says he will lead the organisation if elected president.
Mr Burgess, NFF's trade representative, will contest next month's leadership ballot against former Meat and Livestock Australia boss David Crombie.
The Victorian says making sure farmers get a fair price for their produce and maintain a good relationship with urban Australia are key issues.
He says bringing Western Australia and South Australia back into the NFF fold is also high on his list of priorities.
"At the very highest priority for Allan Burgess in any organisation he's ever been a part of has been about getting a collective view," he said.
"In my experience farm organisations only work well when you can come to one consensus.

Inquiry releases AWB apology
The head of the Oil for Food Inquiry, Commissioner Terence Cole has just released the apology document, prepared between AWB, company lawyers and US public relations consultant Dr Peter Sandman.
The document, drafted by former MD Andrew Lindberg, states that AWB accepts in paying money for inland transportation and after sales service, it paid money to the Iraq government in contravention of the UN sanctions.
The document also states that although there were warning signs, AWB did not challenge the payments and for this they are truly sorry, and deeply regrets any damage this may have caused to Australia's trading reputation, the Australian Government or the United Nations.
The statement admits they failed to consider the implications of UN sanctions, and should have had their own internal systems of checks and balances to stop any abuse of the oil for food program.
It concludes there is no excuse for what happened, that the company simply should have done better, and that Mr Lindberg is deeply sorry that it did not.
AWB had decided not to release the document, but it was mistakenly tendered to the Cole Inquiry, along with other AWB evidence.

Live trade to Egypt may re-start soon
The Federal Government has confirmed it is working on a plan which could see the livestock export trade to Egypt reopen in a matter of weeks.
The trade to Egypt was banned in February when the 60 Minutes program aired footage showing animals being treated outside industry standards.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says his investigations proved the cattle were not Australian, but he shut the trade because the humane handling of Australian animals could not be guaranteed.
The Minister now says industry is forming a plan which will animals treated better.
"There may well be some Australian stockmen or vets or locally employed and trusted staff," he said.
But RSPCA National President Hugh Wirth says more than increased supervision is needed.
"You can do all the supervising you like, it's not going to change the fact that the abattoir workers have a great deal of difficulty dealing with Australian cattle."
Around 12,000 head of cattle were exported to Egypt last year worth around $10 million.
The cattle industry says the findings of a new report add weight to the argument to resume the live cattle trade with Egypt, with appropriate monitoring.
Cameron Hall from Livecorp says the report has found Australia has the highest animal welfare standards in the world.
"There needs to be appropriate systems and appropriate monitoring to ensure some of the reasons that the trade was halted and suspended in the first place, cannot continue and particularly we can guarantee levels of assurance that the animals that we market into those countries are processed and handled with a level of care that we would expect," he said.
The report was commissioned by Livecorp and Meat and Livestock Australia.
The first shipment of live cattle out of the far north Queensland city of Townsville in three years is due to leave at the weekend.

Boom time for feedlots
Strong export demand and the ongoing drought have pushed the feedlot sector to record heights.
Australia now has just under 900,000 head of cattle on feed, with Queensland and Western Australia recording the biggest jumps.
But Malcolm Foster from the Lotfeeders Association has sounded a note of caution.
He says the United States could be back supplying beef into Japan and Korea as early as next month, which will provide stiff competition for our grain-fed product.
"It is very good news, but this situation's been going on now for two years," he said.

Report recommends GM grass for dairy cows
The South Australian Dairyfarmers Association says it will support the introduction of genetically modified (GM) pasture grasses if consumers accept them.
A leaked draft report for the Australian Dairy Industry Council recommends introducing GM grass for dairy cows, after research pointing to massive productivity gains from the new technology.
SA association president, David Basham, says the industry needs to do more investigation.
"We need to keep that research going, we need to make sure that if consumers are ready to move on, we are there ready to adopt," he said.
"If the markets are not willing to accept GM products then we as an industry can't accept it and that may be the way it goes."
And there are deeply divided views on GM pastures in Victoria.

Concerns over inferior wool in bales
Concerns have been raised about the growing number of wool bales that have inferior quality wool deliberately hidden in them.
The Australian Wool Exchange (AWEX) says buyers are losing confidence in the quality of Australian wool because of falsely presented bales and a rise in contaminated and unprepared fleeces.
AWEX woolclasser registrar Greg Sawyer says the market slump has seen growers trying to cut corners, but it is turning buyers off altogether.
"We know of mills around the world that have notified AWEX of wools that for arguments sake may have 10-bale line of fleece wool, eight bales are well prepared and the last two bales may be topped up with inferior wool which hasn't been," he said.

NLIS frustration in Tas
Tasmanian cattle producers are frustrated by the state's roll-out of the National Livestock Identification System.
They are still required to use tailtags, as well as the new electronic ear tags, even though the rest of Australia will be tail-tag free from July 1.
Tasmanian NLIS coordinator John Cameron says they need to be able to guarantee trace-back to the last property of origin before tail tags can be removed.
"At the moment there are still a lot of cattle with NLIS tags in their ears that are not registered to the correct property on the database," he said.
"So if they're sent to a saleyard or abattoir the database doesn't have the correct information about where they are.

Govt assesses drought in NSW
The ongoing impact of the drought is being assessed first hand in New South Wales by Federal Government assessors.
The National Rural Advisory Council has embarked on an extensive tour of areas coming to the end of exceptional circumstances drought relief.
Sheep specialist Doug Alcock has helped the council to understand the severity of the drought from Canberra south to the Alpine region.
"Water is the biggest issue in terms of the effort and money that's been put into infrastructure in terms of tanks and new bores and reticulation systems," he said.
"People running polypipe anything up to a couple of kilometres just to get water into paddocks, it's very expensive and heartbreaking in country that nobody has any living memory of ever going dry some of the springs."
Coastal farmers in the region are also being hit hard by drought.

Sick sheep seek out healthy food: research
Scientists have known for a long time that sheep seek out foods to gather the nutrients they need, but new research suggests they can choose foods to cure illness.
CSIRO Livestock Industries in Western Australia believe sick sheep will search for plants that make them better.
It is conducting a trial in WA's wheatbelt to work out which plants are eaten by sheep to improve their health and production levels.
Senior research scientist Dr Dean Revell says down the track, farmers might even be able to incorporate "medicinal paddocks" into their farm management.
"Maybe they have to have a continual exposure to these, so they have to be incorporated into the grazing base, the feed base," he said.
"The former option is more attractive, where we can set up and manage a separate paddock and take them there when needed.

WA imposes ban to stop virus
Western Australia has banned any plant material from the east which could host the yellow leaf curl virus.
The virus was found in tomato crops near Brisbane and Bundaberg last month.

Fiji looks to dairying
Fiji is hoping for a boom in its dairy industry, as its dominant sugar industry faces a downturn.
A delegation has been touring dairy farms in Victoria this week to investigate alternative ways of farming.
Until recently the European Union has given preferential market treatment to Fijian sugar, but with an EU restructure, it is becoming hard for sugar growers to stay in business.
Economist with the Fijian Ministry of Agriculture Waisiici Gonemaituba thinks favourable rainfall conditions will be an advantage for dairy farmers.
"We get rain nearly every two days which is good for pasture production and the dairy industry as a whole," he said.

Landcare to honour Farley
The Australian Landcare Council plans to pay tribute to co-founder Rick Farley by an annual award in his honour.
A former head of the National Farmers Federation, Mr Farley, as also instrumental in establishing the Landcare movement.
He died on Saturday.
Landcare chairman Bobbie Brazil says the award will honour Mr Farley's work and vision.

Wimmera farmers say AWB should have released apology letter sooner
Wheat growers say AWB could have taken the heat of the accusations it had paid kickbacks to the former Iraqi Government, by publishing a letter of apology before the Oil for Food Inquiry.
The Inquiry yesterday released a document prepared by former AWB managing director Andrew Lindberg in December, which said the company was truly sorry it did not challenge the payments, despite warning signs, and it should have done better.
Farmers in Victoria's Wimmera region say by trying to block the letter's release through the Federal Court, AWB has only raised further questions about what it was trying to hide.
"I would have believed that if it had have been presenter prior to the Cole Inquiry it may have defused quite a lot of the heat and argument within the Cole Inquiry itself," one farmer said.
"In hindsight AWB should have published a very similar letter, if not the same letter early on in the piece and the witch-hunt might not have gone on to the extent that it has," another farmer said.
A rural public relations consultant agrees that the apology document should have been released earlier.
Mark Paterson from Currie Communications says it would have made a big difference to AWB's reputation.
"Looking at the draft statement of contrition, it's an excellent letter of apology," he said.
"Yes it admits guilt, but what it shows is that AWB is human, and at no point at any time during this whole process have they demonstrated any humility at all."
Meanwhile, eight wheat exporters, including Cargill, Glencorp and AWB have bid for the latest tender to supply 3 million tonnes of wheat to India.
AWB has confirmed it will make an offer to supply 1.2 million tonnes of the contract, while the other companies are believed to have offered for smaller amounts.

States debate Murray River funding allocation
There has finally been some progress in efforts to establish a national water trading system.
The eastern states appear to be trying to settle their differences over the future of water at a meeting of the Murray Darling Ministerial Council in Melbourne.
The council is also debating how to carve up an extra $500 million in federal funding to improve the environmental health of the Murray River.
While there is yet to be a national agreement on how water may be bought back by government into the Murray system, the states are making some progress of their own.
Victoria and NSW have reached an in-principle deal to trade water which may be up and running by the end of the year.
While the details of exit fees and other costs are yet to be worked out, both states have agreed the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission should review any deal to make sure it is fair for all sides.
Victoria and South Australia had already an agreement on water trading prior to today's meeting.
Doug Miell from the New South Wales Irrigators Council, says the state has managed to convince Victoria and South Australia of the merits of a system of tagged trading.
"We've got the water that Victoria and South Australia have really got their eyes on, so it's simply a case of he who has the gold makes the rules," he said.

Irrigator groups oppose Snowy Hydro sale
Key irrigator groups in southern New South Wales have withdrawn their support for the sale of the Snowy Hydro electric scheme.
They are worried about a planned 10 per cent cap on individual shareholdings after the company is sold by the federal, New South Wales and Victorian governments.
George Warne from Murray Irrigation says the proposed safeguards are not enough to protect the business from an international takeover.
"I think one of the really big issues is the fact that Australia's largest single stored water resources - the Snowy Hydro scheme and its operation and the timing of releases and the power that is generated from - it is going to leave government ownership and go into private hands," he said.
"We thought they would dissipate that effect by having a maximum cap of 5 per cent or 10 per cent that any one party could own.

Australia to lead climate change deal negotiations
Australia will lead negotiations on a new international climate change deal to replace the Kyoto protocol which is due to expire in 2012.
The framework, to be co-developed with Germany and South Africa, will apply to almost 200 countries.
Mick Keogh from the Australian Farm Institute says farmers have led the way in reducing greenhouse emissions and should not be further penalised.
He says federal and state governments cannot take credit for work largely undertaken by farmers.
"There is only one sector of the Australian economy that's made a very significant contribution to the reduction in the growth of Australia's greenhouse emissions and that is the farm sector," he said.

Seven-day forecasts now available to regional areas
Farmers across Australia can now access seven-day forecasts from the weather bureau, as well as the traditional four-day advice.
Week-long forecasts have been available to city dwellers for some time, but they have now been rolled out on a trial basis at 600 weather sites around Australia, including regional areas.
Anne Farrell from the Bureau of Meteorology in Brisbane says the forecasts have some shortcomings, but will be accurate for a range of factors.
"Temperature-wise I think the performance is generally pretty good," she said.
"Rainfall-wise there's still a lot of work to be done to try and get higher reliability in that as we go further ahead in that seven-day outlook.
"But it's at the point that we think that there's sufficient skill in that, that its worth putting it out there for the public to make use of."
The seven-day forecasts will be available free of charge through a website called Australian

Rio Tinto sets new iron ore price benchmark
Mining giant Rio Tinto has confirmed it will receive 19 per cent more this year for iron ore shipped from WA, making it the benchmark price for other deals.
The deal between Japanese steel mills and Rio Tinto closely follows a similar deal between Germany and Brazil.

Research centres' economic benefits to be evaluated
Australia's Cooperative Research Centres (CRCs) are under review again.
The CRCs are partnerships between government, industry and scientific institutes, undertaking research and development.
To ensure future funding, the economic benefits of individual programs and centres will now be evaluated but Tony Staley from the CRC Association says it is hard to estimate the value of agricultural research.
"And happily the governments are prepared to fund the next part of this work to endeavour to get a real handle, as much as you can, on those cases where you've got thousands of farmers, thousands of small businesses implementing practices, that have been ... recommended and adopted by many many thousands of people and it's very very hard to measure," he said.
Meanwhile there are calls to establish a co-operative research centre for small farms.
North west Victorian horticulturalist Jim Belbin says properties of between 10 and 30 acres are struggling to compete against much larger farms.
He believes an organisation should examine which crops could be sustainably farmed on smaller holdings of land.
"I am certain that there are crops that require intensive farming that are suitable to small holdings," he said.

Pyrethrum prices cut
Tasmanian crop farmers have been dealt another blow, a cut in pyrethrum prices.
Tasmania is the world's second largest producer of the daisy, which is used to make natural insecticide.
Growers group chairman Scott Langton says the 5 per cent price cut has been attributed to a world oversupply and is likely to halt further development.
"What we're really after is just a fair and equitable return so that we can still maintain forward advancement in technology so that we're ready to take up new technology that comes on," he said.

NSW Govt moves to recruit UK nurses
More overseas trained nurses will soon be hitting Australia's shores, this time from the UK.
The New South Wales Government has adopted a recruitment program similar to one operating in Queensland.
A team is heading to the UK next week to hire 400 nurses, with another 600 being sought from Canada and other parts of Europe.
Dr Ross Maxwell from the Rural Doctors Association says it is easier to check the qualifications rather than those of health professionals from Africa or India.
However he says this is not discrimination.
"I would hope that's not the case and I believe that there are sound reasons to target health professionals where you can be confident of their training," he said.

Thousands expected to flock to Fred's Show
The first agricultural show of the year in the Top End is expected to attract 30,000 people through the gates this weekend.
Equestrian events are already under way south of Darwin at the four-day Fred's Pass Rural Show.
Last year 29,500 walked through the gates of the showgrounds, which are nestled amongst five acre rural blocks on Darwin City's southern outskirts.
And this year, a steer auction is being held for the first time and the Territory's Cowboys Association is hoping to draw big crowds to the two days of rodeo.
The hay-stacking event is one of the most competitive and the Tasmanian woodchoppers will showcase their talents for the 18th time.

Buddhist monks connect with Indigenous community
A group of Buddhist monks are finding solace in a far north Western Australian Indigenous community famous for its rock art.
An Indian guru and her nine disciples have been meditating on the pristine Mitchell Plateau of the north Kimberley.
And Aboriginal youth from the local Candiwall community made such an impression that they have been invited to India.
Archaeologist Lee Scott Virtue led the group and says the connection with land was obvious,

Threatened squirrel gilder found in south-east SA
A mammal, similar to a sugar glider, has been found for the first time in the south-east of South Australia.
The squirrel glider is a threatened species more commonly found in western Victorian woodlands and along the eastern seaboard.
SA Department of Environment ecologist Dan Harley says the discovery was made by a researcher at the Museum of South Australia, who thought she was looking at a collection of sugar gliders.
"When she got to this handful of specimens from the Bordertown area, she got some really weird results and scratched her head and couldn't work out what was going on," he said.

Fijians set sights on dairy industry
Fiji is hoping for a boom in its dairy industry, as its dominant sugar industry faces a downturn.
A delegation has been touring dairy farms in Victoria this week to investigate alternative ways of farming .
Until recently the European Union has given preferential market treatment to Fijian sugar but with an EU restructure, it is becoming hard for sugar growers to stay in business.
Economist with the Fijian Ministry of Agriculture Waisiici Gonemaituba thinks favourable rainfall conditions will be an advantage for dairy farmers.
"We get rain nearly every two days which is good for pasture production and the dairy industry as a whole," he said.

Hay export market strong
Australia's hay exports have reached record levels with stronger demand from Japan, Korea and Taiwan.
Murray Smith, from exporting company Balco Australia, says last year exports were valued at more than $200 million.
He says Australia's high quality product is highly sought after and the market is as strong as he has ever seen it.
"If we look at our exports to seasonally adjusted year end of November 05, I think we're up to 685,000 tonnes being exported out of Australia of cereal hay and straw and that's a record as far as I'm concerned," he said.

Birdsville Track pastoralists face continuing drought
After battling seven years of drought pastoralists on the Birdsville Track in South Australia are reaching breaking point.
Some have not had a decent drop of rain since July last year, forcing them to either sell or agist most of their cattle interstate.
Shane Oldfield from Clayton Station says this is the worst he has ever seen it:
"We always get drought's in this country you know two, three years, four years is a real bad one - this is the daddy of them all," he said.

Iraq wheat deal collapses
A deal to sell 350,000 tonnes of Australian wheat to Iraq is off.
The sale was brokered by the consortium Wheat Australia after Iraq announced it would no longer do business with AWB.
The consortium involving ABB, Graincorp and CBH is blaming increased demands from the Iraqi Grains Board although it will not specify what they were.
It has rejected suggestions its inexperience in Iraq was a factor or because the wheat came from AWB's national pool.
Spokesman Rhys Ainsworth says the sale was not in the best interests of wheat growers.
"There were a couple of commercial issues that Wheat Australia, given that Wheat Australia are negotiating on behalf of Australian wheat growers, weren't able to agree to and unfortunately we weren't able to broker a deal over the last eight to 10 weeks despite what have been very positive discussions," he said.
"We're disappointed for Australian wheat growers.
"Wheat Australia came together following the efforts of the Government to secure this opportunity.
"Certainly several of the areas that we weren't able to reach agreement on weren't what you'd call common I suppose."
AWB, which has veto rights over export deals, says it will reconsider whether other companies can tackle the Iraq market.

Private member's bill
Meanwhile Liberal MP Wilson Tuckey says he will introduce a private member's bill to Parliament to remove AWB's ability to veto other companies from exporting wheat, if the Government does not.
Mr Tuckey says it was highly predictable a deal would not be reached because the wheat wasn't sold at 'arms-length' from AWB.
He says he will talk to the Australian Grain Exporters Association today to encourage its members to lodge wheat export applications for Iraq.
But he says the Government must also act to reduce AWB's power.
"It's now necessary that the Government in its ambition to ensure that the trade is maintained to go to Brooks Grain or one of the, as some refer to them, the foreign devils, be given every opportunity to see if they can stitch up a deal and it should be the Government's, if necessary, urgent legislation to make sure that deliveries can be obtained," he said.

AWB earnings
Despite a rocky few months, AWB is expected to post good half year earnings this week on the back of a solid wheat harvest.
Analysts say the recent poor share price is due to speculation about the future of the single desk and not the company's performance.
There are also reports today that a major management shake-up could be announced, although the company is not commenting.
Commsec analyst Grant Saligari says those rumours have not been put to the market.
"There's been nothing flagged to us by the company at this stage that they will, but that's a possibility," he said.
"The underlying results should still be reasonably robust. There's likely to be a number of one-off costs associated with the Cole inquiry, they'll certainly impact the result.
"It's likely to be higher than the originally flagged cost, as long as the inquiry goes on, I guess they'll continue to have those one-offs."
In another development AWB is gaining a foothold in the dairy sector, announcing a deal between its Landmark company and New Zealand processor Fonterra.

Plan to deliver rural broadband may be dumped
Telstra has confirmed it is considering dumping a project to connect broadband Internet to thousands of country homes.
The plan involves Extel technology, which boosts the power of telephone exchanges by up to 20 kilometres.
But Telstra is concerned that rival companies will be able to use the technology.
Spokeswoman Liz Jurman says there are also other problems with the rollout of Extel and the company is now looking at alternative ways of delivering broadband to rural and remote areas.
"The extender can't be used on individual customers you need to provide it where there are clusters of demand, so obviously that depends on customer demand, so we haven't yet made a final decision on that product," she said.
"And it's important to understand this device is not the be all and end all for providing ADSL to customers.

US cattlemen losing confidence in Japanese market
The US-based National Cattlemen's Beef Association says it is losing confidence in the Japanese market with its refusal to set a timetable to reopen the beef trade.
Spokesman Jay Truitt says the US has done all it can to reassure Japan that American beef is safe.
But Japanese authorities now want to do their own inspections of US meatworks after a prohibited shipment, including spinal bones, made it to Japan in January.
While he is still hoping for the market to reopen soon, Mr Truitt says Japan is a less reliable market for US producers.
"Our focus in the future is going to be more towards Korea, existing markets like Mexico and Canada, frankly, which is the fourth largest existing market for the United States and other countries around the Pacific rim," he said.
Despite the uncertainty, some reports suggest Japan could resume imports of US beef in July.
Following talks last week, Japanese experts have reportedly told US authorities they are "basically content" with measures to protect shipments from mad cow disease.
Meat and Livestock Australia's regional manager in Tokyo Samantha Jamieson says the July start date is sooner the expected but should not cause alarm for Australian producers.

Demand for bananas prompts desperate measures
Competition to find enough bananas is heating up in New South Wales as prices continue to hover well over $100 a carton.
Before cyclone Larry wiped out the north Queensland crop, growers in New South Wales were receiving under $10 a carton.
Coffs Harbour grower Mick Gentle says growers are receiving constant phone calls from agents looking for more fruit and one has even bought a local plantation to ensure supply.

Chinese currency may push wool higher
The wool market is hoping for further gains this week, boosted by a re-evaluation of the Chinese currency.
The value of the yuan has been strengthened against the US dollar and wool market analysts say it is already being felt in Australia.
The eastern market indicator rose 16 cents last week to close at 729 cents a kilogram clean.
Landmark's Phil Speers says with the Chinese buying around 60 per cent of Australia's total clip, there could be further price rises.
"This obviously makes their currency more competitive against the Australian currency which is going to make it easier for them to come in and buy our wools," he said.

Water deal will bring benefits, says commission chief
The head of the Murray Darling Basin Commission is defending the impact of the new interstate water trading agreement.
Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia have signed a deal to trade water across state borders, while the Federal Government has signalled its interest in buying water for the environment.
Chief executive Wendy Craik says while there are concerns about the social impact of water being sold out of communities, there are other benefits as well.
"Yes, when water leaves an area often you know there may be an immediate impact and quite often yes they're not positive but often new enterprises arise up in those areas from where the water's gone because people have money that they didn't otherwise have from selling their water entitlement," she said.

WA farmers anxious for rain
Graingrowers in Western Australia are anxiously waiting for some substantial rainfall to come out of a cold front expected to pass through in the next two days.
Along with many farmers in the east, growing in the northern agricultural regions have been dry sowing since March and are now starting to worry about the impact of the ongoing dry.
CSIRO plant scientist John Passioura says farmers underestimate how strong seeds really are.
"If you have a false start and you get a bit of rain and the seed starts to swell up and so and it's done all of the getting the machinery ready to go, the biochemical machinery, then, it will skip that phase when you get the next good rain," he said.

Demand for alpaca wool increasing
If you have got an alpaca or two running around the backyard, you are being urged to shear it and sell the fleece.
The industry's marketing body says there has been a big jump in demand for alpaca fibre which cannot be met.
John Bentley, from the Australian Alpaca Association, says because the animals are valued as pets, or guard animals, there is less focus on their fleece.
"The value is still highly in the animal, which tends to make the fleece at this point in time, more a by-product, but we do have to get the product out there to the public, get them familiar with alpaca," he said.

Sexy smells may help trap toads
Bottling up cane toads' sexual odours is the latest left-field idea to trap the noxious pest.
The new research builds on a discovery that the pheromones excreted by a native male frog attracts female frogs at large.
Dr Mike Tyler from the University of Adelaide says they are hoping cane toad smells will have a similar pulling power.
"If it's an attractant we would be able to attract perhaps females in such numbers that instead of having to go around and pick up one here and one there, we might be able to attract them together," he said.

Govt optimistic contract changes could save wheat deal
The Federal Government says a 350,000 tonne wheat deal between Australia and Iraq could be salvaged.
Yesterday, the Wheat Australia consortium said it had failed to come to terms with Iraq and negotiations for the $90 million deal were over.
But Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran believes Iraq is considering removing a clause in the contract which Wheat Australia had found unacceptable.
"Negotiations are not necessarily over," he said. "Wheat Australia is working very hard in the interests of growers to complete the sale."
"They've taken a strong line in regard to one particular clause, which they believe would disadvantage commercially Australian growers and that's entirely proper and the right thing for them to do, and it may well be that the Iraqi side is now reconsidering they're insistence in the insertion of that particular clause."
But wheat growers in Victoria say they are not surprised the deal has stalled.
While some say the contract tender should be opened to other companies, others believe it shows the single desk is the only successful system.
"The world wheat market is the highest it has been for five years. We've got people out there wanting to pay a good price for our wheat yet we are not able to fix these deals," one wheat grower said.

Wheat futures near all-time highs
