Head of sheep productivity, Dr Troy Fischer, says the sheep may also produce better wool.
"Like with any trait there's variation involved, but [it] essentially demonstrates there is potential to select for improved wool quality plus the bare breech trait," he said.

Court to hear AWB push to keep documents secret
The Federal Court has agreed to hear AWB's bid to keep 1,300 documents secret from the oil for food inquiry.

'Shear' hard work pays off for Aussies in Canada
Australia has beaten the world at an international sheep shearing competition at the Calgary Stampede in Alberta, Canada.
The Australian team of Rob Glover, from Bothwell in Tasmania and Jason Wingfield, from Victoria, beat New Zealand, the United States and Canada in a test match series over two days at Canada's biggest agricultural show, which attracts more than 1.3 million people.
Mr Glover said it was great to get a win over the highly favoured Kiwis.

Farm group rethinks GM crops ban support
The New South Wales Farmers Association has withdrawn its support for a ban on genetically modified (GM) crops.
The association has passed a motion asking for the immediate lifting of the state's moratorium on GM crops.
Grain producer Michael Matthews says it is a victory for progressive farmers.
"This is a technology that we have to have to be able to compete on the world stage. Without this technology we're going to be sinking further and further behind," he said.
"This technology is all about producing greener crops, cleaner crops, healthier crops, crops grown with 70 per cent less herbicide and are more friendly to our environment.

Councils say water initiative hurting rates revenue
New South Wales local councils say they are facing a dramatic drop in rates revenue as a result of the National Water Initiative.
Under the water reform process, land and water titles are being separated which is expected to cause a drop in rates for irrigated land.
Councils now have to come up with a new rating formula to make up the difference.
The Nationals' Member for Murrumbidgee, Adrian Piccoli, is calling on the State Government to give councils more time and more help to make the changes.
"The Victorian Government has postponed the implementation of these new council rating structures by two years," he said.

Tradefresh launches takeover bid for Chiquita
A takeover bid has been launched for fresh fruit and vegetable company Chiquita Brands South Pacific.
The bid has been launched by Tradefresh, a company owned by agribusiness giant Timbercorp and the Costa Group, with an offer of 73 cents a share.
Market analyst Toby Grimm says the company's shares have traded much higher, but have experienced a slump over recent weeks.

Foreign buyers warn Australian sheep too expensive
Overseas buyers of live sheep are complaining that Australian livestock prices are too high.
In the Middle East, importers are warning that live sheep from countries like Somalia and India are constantly undercutting Australian mutton in the marketplace.
Jasem Al Dhahi from the Emirates Livestock and Meat Trading Company in Dubai says the price of Australian sheep has jumped four times in the past month, and his customers are looking elsewhere.
"In the last four ships now, the prices get high, high, high," he said.
"I cannot in the future buy more sheep from Australia. In the past maybe I buy 15,000, the next ship I will say send me 7,000."
Meanwhile, another shipload of Australian live sheep has just been unloaded at the port of Jebel Ali, near Dubai.
About 12,000 are now being held at one of the Middle East's most modern feedlots.
The feedlot is one of the most advanced facilities of its type in the Middle East.
The conditions are extremely hot at 50 degrees in the sun, but under the 34 hectares of shadecloth it is a more respectable 45 degrees Celcius.
When full, the housing facility can accommodate about 90,000 Australian sheep.
The most recent shipment arrive after a 16-day journey from Fremantle, with no evidence of foot soreness or too much heat stress, and are fed water that is specially cooled by big refrigeration units.

Transport industry fears higher fuel costs amid Mid East crisis
The transport sector is bracing for even higher fuel prices, as a result of the escalating crisis in the Middle East.
Analysts say it is only a matter of time before crude oil hits $US100 a barrel, leading to bowser prices of about $2 a litre.
Luke Fraser from the Livestock Transporters Association says trucking operators are already finding it hard to break even, and they will have to pass on the increased costs, with flow-on affects for the farming and export sectors.
"It is going to be difficult, but I think that more than that it is probably going to affect the whole meat and livestock chain and indeed grains and anything else that is being carried in the bush," he said.

Pork supplier plays down hepatitis A concerns
One of the country's largest pork suppliers says there is little risk of its customers contracting hepatitis A, despite one of its staff falling ill from the virus earlier this month.
Toowoomba-based company KR Castlemaine Foods, in southern Queensland, is today advertising product recall notices in all national newspapers.
Over the next two days KR Castlemaine is recalling 6,000 cartons of product from across Australia.
The president of parent company Darling Downs Foods, Mike Adams, says the staff member has recovered from the potentially fatal virus, which she contracted from a friend visiting from overseas.
"Queensland Health has said that there is nothing wrong with any of the systems or any of the ways we manufacture or produce the product," he said.
The recall will see 17 lines of ready-to-eat products including shaved and sliced ham turkey and chicken replaced, and is expected to cost the company $500,000.

Bagasse project's potential excites mill manager
Yesterday morning you might have heard Gordon Edwards talking about his plans to process and then sell Bagasse from the Mossman Mill to buyers in Japan.
Mr Edward's company Kristevefourspace has formed a joint venture with the mill and the plan is to sell bagasse fibre as a healthy food additive.
He says there is a strong demand for bagasse because the Japanese Government is pushing for an increased fibre content in school children's lunches.
Mr Edwards says if everything goes according to plan they should produce about $17.5 million worth of bagasse fibre.
"We currently have a joint venture agreement with the mill where we pay for all consumables with a percentage of gross on top so the mill can't lose out," he said.
"The value of bagasse powder compared to raw sugar is ten to one.
"Basically 40-50 cents for raw sugar, $5 a kilo for bagasse powder."
He says one processing machine has already been installed at the mill and soon three more will be in place.
Mossman Mill manager Alan Johnstone says he is excited about the bagasse project's potential because the technology has already been trialed in Okinawa and he hopes the Mossman trial proves equally successful.
Mr Johnstone says so far only a memorandum of understanding has been signed between the mill and Kristevefourspace and nothing is in writing regarding the breakdown of future profits.

Timbercorp, Costas launch Chiquita takeover bid
Agri-investment company Timbercorp has announced it is involved in a take-over bid for mushroom and fruit marketing company Chiquita Brands South Pacific.
For the bid, Timbercorp has joined forces with the Costa family to form a company called Tradefresh, which has offered 73 cents per share to buy out Chiquita.
The Costa group already owns 26 per cent of Chiquita shares.
If the bid is successful Timbercorp would end up with a 35 per cent share in Chiquita and the Costa family the remaining 65 per cent.
Bananas only represent about 15 per cent of Chiquita's normal annual turnover and before cyclone Larry the company marketed about 12 per cent of all bananas sold in Australia.
Mushrooms are Chiquita's biggest commodity making up about 35 to 40 per cent of its annual turnover, some from the Stanthorpe area in south-east Queensland.
Chiquita managing director Mano Babiolakis says he has only just heard about this takeover bid so he has advised shareholders not to take any action until it has been carefully assessed.
Timbercorp is a specialist investment management company involved in the Australian horticulture and forestry industries.
Timbercorp's deputy CEO Sol Rabinowicz believes Chiquita would be a sensible addition to their portfolio.
"Both we and Costas believe that there's an opportunity to join together the strength of the Costa group as one of Australia's leaders in fresh produce, farm management, packing, processing and marketing together with Chiquita's strengths as a category manager particularly in the area like berries, mushrooms and citrus," he said.
"We think that it can sit together, they can become a more efficient operator."

Cape York Peninsula: the ideal training ground?
Some Cape York Peninsula cattle producers believe far north Queensland properties offer the ideal training ground for young trainees into the industry and they are appealing to the Government to support some sort of subsidised training scheme.
The big side benefit would be properties could access much needed workers for dry season mustering.
Yesterday Greg Jenkins, from Strathburn Station, brought up the problem of workers and how hard it is to recruit young people to cattle properties in far north Queensland.
The problem is young people can earn more money elsewhere and compared to previous generations, Mr Jenkins believes the youth of today are less inclined to work in remote areas.
Jay Willmann's family runs Yarraden station near Coen but they have only been there three years after coming up from central Queensland.
Mr Willmann says on Cape York Peninsula properties the work is intense, varied and exciting so young people learn the ropes a lot quicker than down south.
"I worked in central Queensland a lot, all over stations," he said.
"The biggest thing is they didn't have the variety of work that we have up here.

Farmers welcome EC assistance extension
Farmers across four states have welcomed the Federal Government's decision to extend drought relief until next year.
Exceptional circumstances (EC) have been extended in 23 drought-declared areas in Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia.
Under the scheme, farmers and pastoralists who are been battling drought receive income and business support.
Tiffany Lord, from Yudnapinna Station west of Port Augusta in South Australia, says it is impossible to underestimate the importance of the assistance.
"It's helped out keep us afloat, I'm sure that it's helping a lot of other people who are in the same predicament out this way," he said.

Canola crop estimates cut
The 2006 canola crop estimates have been reduced to 1.4 million tonnes - 50,000 tonnes down on last year.
The Australian Oilseeds Federation says late sowing in many areas, and cold, dry weather during June has led to the lower forecast.

Businessman fined $1.2m over abalone trade
A Queensland businessman has been fined a record $1.2 million for his role in an elaborate abalone trading ring.
David Wei Meng Lee was been found guilty in Hobart's Criminal Court of five counts of illegally possessing abalone.
Between August 2001 and March 2002 the 49-year-old received consignments of dried abalone from Tasmania at his Gold Coast seafood retail outlet.
Lee is one of 17 people who were charged as a result of a police surveillance program known as Operation Oakum.
The $1.2 million fine is the largest penalty imposed on any of them.
In handing down the fine, Justice Shan Tennant said she thought it unlikely Lee would be able to pay it all.

'Contractual requirements' delay wheat shipment
There have been more delays in shipping wheat to India, with grain from Western Australia under intense scrutiny to ensure it meets tough contractual requirements.
Quarantine concerns have held up two previous shipments to India this year.
The latest consignment is being loaded onto a ship at Esperance today, which has been waiting in the bay for more than two weeks.
AWB'S Western Australian manager, Paul Ryan, says a combination of factors caused the delay.
"There's a very strict and extensive pre-testing and testing program before the vessel is loaded that has to be adhered to under this Indian contract," he said.

Shipping delay to leave US retailers short of fruit
There is a looming shortage of Australian citrus in US supermarkets, after engine problems delayed the third shipment of this year's exports.
The ship was delayed in Port Adelaide by 12 days.
Steve Allen, from exporter Riversun, says it will be the first time market demand cannot be met.
"Unfortunately we will run out of fruit for probably a week or less, which means that some supermarkets may go to South Africa but look there is a shortage of fruit in the United States," he said.

Productivity review results disappointing: Truss
State and federal-owned corporations dealing with road, rail, ports and other export infrastructure are under-performing, according to a new analysis by the Productivity Commission.
Treasurer Peter Costello has seized on the report as another example of the need for the Federal Government to take control of important national assets, although the Opposition says the Government's track record is woeful.
Federal Transport Minister Warren Truss says the review results are disappointing.
He says the mindset within government-owned companies has to change.
"Obviously we expect maximum performance from our services and our utilities - that's essential to build a productive trading arrangement and to ensure that our country is able to pay its way," he said.
"It is disappointing that some companies do not perform well,.
"Of course the very act of corporatising a utility doesn't make it profitable.

Audit report urges illegal land clearing test cases
A new report by the New South Wales auditor-general shows 40 per cent of the 74,000 hectares cleared of vegetation last year was done illegally.
While satellite images are being used to provide accurate information for the first time, the report shows illegal clearing is not as widespread as conservationists have claimed.
Auditor-General Bob Sendt is warning farmers, particularly in western New South Wales, that with new laws, the State Government is in a position to clamp down on illegal clearing.
"The Government and the Department of Natural Resources needs to make it clear to those elements of the rural community that want to continue to clear land illegally that the new legislation does have bite," he said.

Victorian water traders set new record
There is more evidence of growing agricultural water sales in Victoria, with a record amount of permanent water traded in the state's north-west last financial year.
Almost 26,000 megalitres of additional water moved into the region, mainly from upstream along the Murray River.
Owen Russell from Lower Murray Water says most of the new water is being used by almond growers between Robinvale and Nyah.
"We've seen water come in effectively from out of the Goulburn Murray irrigation district region," he said.

Rain boosts young cattle prices
Recent rain across parts of the eastern seaboard has helped to drive up cattle prices.
The Eastern Young Cattle Indicator, a benchmark of young cattle prices across saleyards in eastern Australia, jumped eight cents to 371 cents dressweight last night.
AgConcepts Analyst Angus Brown says a tight supply of cattle and increased demand from producers has prompted the increase, which is likely to continue.
"Low supply always forces prices up as lot feeders looking for cattle and processors looking for cattle and restockers are looking for something to put on the grass they are going to have in about a month," he said.

Australian, NZ dairy farmers share research costs
They might be rivals in international trade but Australian and New Zealand dairy farmers are about to get a whole lot closer, with a new partnership to share research costs.
Following support from farmer organisations in both countries, Dairy Australia and New Zealand company Dairy Insight will focus on improving pre-farmgate research, including industry development, education and training.
The head of the Australian Dairy Industry Council, Allan Burgess, says it makes sense to reduce costs.
"We think there's very limited resources available for farmers and things we can do together are going to be more efficient," he said.

New Middle East lamb exports record set
Australia has recorded its highest ever monthly sales figures for lamb to the Middle East.
In June, sales hit 824 tonnes - 100 tonnes higher than the previous record.
Ian Ross, the Middle Eastern manager for Meat and Livestock Australia, says the quality of Australian lamb is recognised by supermarket and restaurant buyers.
"There's a great response now to the flavour of Australian lamb, and also there's a strong awareness of [it]," he said.
"We've been doing all we can now for some time to encourage the awareness of the safety systems and the traceability, the integrity of the Australian halal system because we are talking about a Muslim community.

Algae project wins renewable energy grant
A Queensland company trying to produce biodiesel from algae is among the recipients of $10.5 million in federal grants for renewable energy projects.
Energy Minister Ian Macfarlane says Brisbane company SQC is getting $220,000 for its work with algae.
"The algae produces an oil extract which can then be used for biodiesel," he said.
The company wants to commercialise a process which could be suitable for farm dams and irrigation lagoons.
The biggest grant recipient is CSR Sugar's centre at the University of Queensland, which has received $5 million for work to produce a new sugarcane with more fermentable sugar suitable to ethanol and biofuels.

Internet helps farmers recruit backpackers
Video conference technology is helping job agencies tap into the backpacker market in Australia's far north-west.
One company has set up remote facilities in Broome, Western Australia, interviewing travelling workers over the Internet and then employing them to work in the farm sector.
One of the regions looking for workers is the east Kimberley, which looks set to have a bumper mango harvest.
Grower Lachlan Dobson doubts local labour will meet demand.
"There's guesstimates going around at the moment that Kununurra mango production might be up around 400,000 trays," he said.

Project Gold to tell farm families' stories
A youth arts project has been launched in southern New South Wales to stimulate debate about water use and drought.
Under Project Gold more than 30 students will develop digital and media skills by working with the not-for-profit organisation BIG hART.
Spokesman Casey Ankers says their new skills will be used to tell the stories of farm families from southern Queensland to northern Victoria.
"What we're looking at doing is skilling up the young people to work with us, work with the BIG hART artists and go out to rural communities and gather narratives from rural families that have been affected by the drought," he said.

Countries aim to salvage trade deal
The world's most influential trade ministers are meeting in Geneva this weekend to try to resurrect global free trade talks.
Six nations, including Australia, will be attempting to salvage a deal.
Australia's push to reduce trade barriers is receiving support from local meat importers in Europe.
The Australian sheepmeat sector is pushing for an increase to the 19,000 tonne sheepmeat quota in the European Union.
One of the biggest importers of lamb and beef into France, Claude Thieblemont, says if import quotas were lifted, local consumption could double.
"France is very short of production, we supply 40 per cent of all needs and we import 60 per cent of our lamb from abroad," he said.
"We would expect to import more from Australia because we like the Australian product. French suppliers [are] buying five kilo per capita per year which is very low and we could multiply this by two or three, easily."
Professor Andrew Stoler from the Institute for International Trade says world leaders appear keen to agree to reforms after this week's G8 summit in St Petersburg.
He says that should help to break the deadlock.
"What is going to move the process forward is not the sort of political direction that came out of the recent G8 meetings," he said.
"You can't really get any higher level than that unless God comes down and tells them you have to get a deal.

Authority approves canola export licences
The Grains Licensing Authority (GLA) in Western Australia has approved three small export licences for 75,000 tonnes of canola aimed at higher priced markets in Europe and the Middle East.
GLA chairman Wayne Obst says higher tonnages were not approved because crop predictions are forecast to be dismal this year.
Two applications to send malting barley to China were knocked back because of the dry conditions in the west.
Mr Obst says the authority can easily prove the restriction on export licences will benefit growers.
"These canola licences have gone to a higher priced market, that's been caused by the request for canola into the biodiesel market," he said.

Much needed rain falls on very dry regions
There is some hope for Western Australia's grain growers today after rain fell overnight in some very dry regions.
While it is too late for farmers in the large grain growing districts in the northern-mid-west, moderate to good falls further south will boost thirsty crops.
Weather bureau forecaster Noel Puzey says the really good news is that a more wintry weather pattern is setting in.
"There have been some reasonable falls to help people along at the moment, falls range from about six millimetres at Dalwallinu in the Central Wheatbelt to 20 millimetres through some parts of the Great Southern and it is still moving through to the east so mainly southern districts can pick up a few showers around the place," he said.
A group of Victorian farmers are developing a national grading system for biodiesel to assure its quality.
With more and more farmers blending their own fuel, the Central Wimmera Community Enterprise group says the system will quash concerns that biodiesel could damage engines.
Chairman Peter Neiwand says once an Australian biodiesel standard is in place, the Federal Government will be lobbied to reinstate tax breaks.

US to scale back mad cow disease testing
United States Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns says his department will scale back its expanded testing for mad cow disease due to its extremely low rates.
Mr Johanns says years of expanded and normal testing shows the US is likely to have four to seven infected animals and reducing current testing almost ten-fold to 40,000 a year is still well above international guidelines.
Mr Johanns dismisses concerns the move will cause a new rift with Japan, whose food safety body wants continued high US testing.
"We have bent over backwards with the Japanese, we've even agreed with them to ship only beef from animals under 20-months and that's a very unique, very, very unusual agreement," he said.

Qld mining sector continues to boom
Queensland's mining boom continues to power ahead with the Queensland Government nominating a large parcel of land for future mineral exploration.
Labor Member for Mount Isa Tony McGrady says nearly 3,500 square kilometres will be offered under a tender system for prospective mining companies.
He says they will also get data showing deposits of copper, lead, zinc and silver.
"As a result of the work they now have information on mineral prospectivitiy in an area of land bigger than the ACT," he said.

SAFF seeks help to boost membership
South Australia's peak farming body wants farmers to help boost membership levels.
Only 65 farmers made the trip to a public workshop in Adelaide today to help redirect the South Australian Farmers Federation (SAFF) into the future.
SAFF is asking farmers across the state to come up with ideas to make the organisation more relevant particularly to younger farmers.
The organisation's membership is falling there are currently 4,000 members while there were 11,000 back in the 1980's.

Grower challenges importers to buy Aust coffee beans
An organic coffee producer from New South Wales is challenging Australia's three main coffee importers to buy locally grown beans.
Australians drink nearly 50,000 tonnes of coffee a year and almost all of it is imported.
Organic grower Cath Ford says the industry has to demonstrate the quality of local coffee to consumers and coffee suppliers.
"Quite frankly people will buy commodity fair trade coffee over Australian coffee if we can not get across that the quality and flavour is different," she said.
"We need to get on our bandwagon and show that what we have is a supreme product over other people's."

Scientists discover bug behind sheep mastitis
Scientists have discovered sheep mastitis is being caused by a different bug than first thought.
The inflammation of milk glands kills 5 per cent of ewes in Poll Dorset, Suffolk and Texel flocks each year.
Dr Stuart Barber from the University of Melbourne has found mannheimia is the most common bacteria causing the problem.
It was previously thought staphylococcus brought on the disease, as it does in cows.
Dr Barber says this new information is crucial.

Sprouts can curb cancer: DPI
New research has shown eating the sprouts that are often found in mixed salads can help curb cancer.
The Queensland Department of Primary Industries (DPI) has investigated 22 different brassicas, including broccoli and cauliflower.
It has found sprouts can contain up to 200 times more of a chemical which helps dissolve carcinogens, than mature vegetables do.
DPI physiologist Tim O'Hare says radish and broccoli sprouts rated the highest.

Program aims to get country kids talking about depression
A new program tackling depression in country schools is trying to encourage students and teachers to be more open about mental illness.
The beyondblue program comes as new research shows depression and suicide are the two biggest concerns for country kids.
And while students are most likely to turn to their families and friends for support, it is hoped they will also open up to their teachers.
Queensland school counsellor Gary Quinn says students at his school are becoming more willing to talk about depression.
"Most students, once they start doing something to say 'hey help me', they really do want some help," he said.

Fergies flock to flood festival
The heroic feats of the famous grey Ferguson tractor are being celebrated in the New South Wales town of Wentworth this weekend.
The Festival of the Flood will see 300 fergies of all shapes are sizes attending to commemorate massive floods in 1956.
The fergies will be the stars of the show because they were used to build levee banks to stop the rising floodwater and protect the town.
Fergie enthusiast John Reeves from Geelong will be there and can not wait to catch up with others who share his passion.

Website to track drought impact
The Federal Government has unveiled its plan to make it easier for farmers to apply for drought relief.
The national agricultural monitoring system is a website which will track how major agricultural regions are performing.
While state governments could take weeks or months to collate drought information under the old application process, John Sims from the Bureau of Rural Sciences says the new system will take minutes.
"There's information on rainfall, there's information on how that rainfall affects pasture and crop growth, and how that translates into impact on say farm financial performance over the last couple of years," he said.

Councils come to farmers' aid
With Western Australia in the grip of a dry year, local councils are looking for different ways to help farmers who are struggling to grow a crop this season.
The Shire of Mullewa and the Shire of Chapman Valley will offer road works and community project works to farmers, so they can generate an income.
Mullewa president Nino Messina says the council has received extra funding for road works and employing farmers makes sense.
"The harvesting will come and farmers won't be able to do anything because they'll have no crop to harvest," he said.
The Queensland Nationals are calling on the Federal Government for better measures to protect regional media diversity under its proposed changes to media ownership laws.
The Nationals want the Government to set a mandate for local radio content and legislation to prevent a single company from owning more than two out of three news services in regional centres, including television, radio and newspapers.
But lecturer in media policy and research at the University of Western Sydney Dr Tim Dwyer says the provisions in the Nationals' resolution fall well short of any sort of guarantee to provide a diverse range of local news.

PigPass to identify food safety risks
Pork producers have welcomed a new identification system to trace animals from pig pen to plate.
PigPass is a national vendor declaration form which must accompany pigs being processed for domestic and export markets.
It is being rolled out now and should be fully in place by January 2007.
David Miles from the Victorian Farmers Federation's pig group says any disease or food safety risks will be identified with the new pass.
"There's got to be traceback. If we haven't got traceability well we're not going to be able to export or do anything professionally and it will control the industry, as I understand, and the VFF pig group we're quite happy with this," he said.

Labor backs calls for quarantine system inquiry
The Federal Opposition has joined calls for an independent inquiry into Australia's quarantine system.
The call follows moves from the New South Wales Government and the New South Wales Farmers Association for a Senate inquiry.

Top End water region to be mapped
The last major unstudied water region of the Northern Territory's Top End is about to be mapped and modelled.
The Gulf region extends from Mataranka to the Gulf of Carpentaria and has a number of large, permanently running rivers.
Over the next three years the Territory Government will uncover not only how the aquifers and rivers interact, but also measure how much water the environment uses.
Project officer Ursula Zarr says they need to know how much water there is so they can protect everyone's interests.

Committee chairman rules out renewed push for Hydro privatisation
The chairman of an New South Wales Upper House Committee looking at the future of the Snowy Hydro scheme has rejected reports that it will renew a push for privatisation.
The State Government ruled out trying to sell off its share of the scheme earlier this year, when the Federal and Victorian Governments pulled out of the plan.

Banana industry looks at cyclone-proofing
The banana industry is looking at ways to become cyclone-proof to avoid a repeat of this year's shortage.
The Australian Banana Growers Council wants to strengthen smaller growing areas, such as Western Australia's Gascoyne to ensure customer demand can be met.
Cyclone Larry wiped out most of north Queensland's crop in March, driving up the price of available fruit.
Spokesman Tony Heidrich says markets and retailers need to allow smaller growing areas to keep a foothold in the market once Queensland fruit returns.
"You'll never completely cyclone proof the industry," he said.
"But what we're saying is we've obviously got a real problem this time around in having such a big cyclone knock out so much of our production.

No breakthrough in world farm trade talks
There is no sign yet of a breakthrough in last ditch world farm trade talks in Geneva.
The G6, including Australia, Japan, the US and the European Union is meeting in what is considered a final attempt to resolve five years of discussions about trade reform.

Dairy co-ops increase returns to farmers
New South Wales regional dairy cooperatives have bucked the trend of the major milk processors by increasing returns to farmers this season.
Norco and the Bega Cooperative on the north and south coasts have announced step-ups in their milk prices.
Janet Moxey from the New South Wales Farmers Association has welcomed the move and believes it could be due to a delay in passing on last year's high returns.
"I don't think New South Wales farmers have actually seen the flow-on of the good times in Victoria last year," Ms Moxey said.
"Farmers in New South Wales locked into contracts for a 12-month period and didn't see the step-up payments that were paid out in Victoria.

Egg farmer seeks tightening of free-range legislation
Consumers are being warned that eggs marked 'free-range' could actually come from caged birds.
Some producers claim that some farmers are falsely labelling their eggs and are urging consumers to look out for accreditation from an independent authority like the RSPCA.
Free range farmer Tom Fryar has told ABC TV's Landline program that there is no legal definition of the term free-range and legislation should be tightened.

Book to focus on mothers and daughters-in-law' relationship
The relationships between mothers and their daughters-in-law on family farms is set to go under the microscope in a new book by a South Australian author.
Abi Spehr, from Beachport in South Australia, says introducing a new person into an established family business can be traumatic regardless of whether the two women get along.
She says there has been little research done on what can be a difficult relationship and it is time there was.

Tas vodka wins international awards
A Tasmanian distillery which exports vodka to Russia has won two international awards at the Wine and Spirits Fair in London.
The Tamar Distillery, at Beauty Point in northern Tasmania, received bronze medals for its citrus-infused dry gin and Tasmanian pepperberry vodka.
Manager Phillip Ridyard says Tasmania's pristine water helped the company to crack into the tough Russian market.
"The primary reason is the water and the selection of the water because the crucial part of vodka is low calcium," Mr Ridyard said.
"And we produce three blends using three waters, one from the west coast, one from near Scottsdale and a sample from York Town.
"We then held a blind tasting with a group of expatriate Russians.

Wine glut blamed for price drop
Wine prices have hit an all-time low, with a major supermarket chains selling bottles of clean skin chardonnay and merlot for $2.00 a bottle.
The move has sent shockwaves through the battling industry, with the wines normally selling for $6.00.
The massive discounting is being blamed on the wine glut and follows a trend set in the US in 2003.
Chief executive of the Wine Makers Federation of Australia Stephen Strachan says it is a very worrying development.
"I don't think anyone in the industry would've expected that we get to that point," he said.
"What it does is it undermines the strength of existing brands and it means that the temptations for those brands to try and meet similar price points is there because they obviously want to be able to sell their wine.

Farmers warned to watch out for food mile phenomenon
Australian farmers have been warned to take note of a new consumer trend in the United Kingdom.
Companies who import Australian beef into Britain and the European Union are wary of the new phrase 'food miles' which could be used to limit imports into that country.
Food miles refers to the growing practice of importers and supermarket chains stacking their shelves with exotic items from around the world.
The criticism is they are chewing through too much aircraft and truck fuel in getting them there, thereby increasing carbon emissions.
Retail manager from Global, UK's biggest meat importer and also an importer of Australian beef, Bob Rose, says we need to keep an eye on the food mile phenomenon.
"In the UK at the moment, global warming is a very big issue," Mr Rose said.
"And one of the issues that has raised its head is bringing product from around the world, and the costs of the carbon emissions to the environment of bringing that product from around the world; would it not bet better sourcing locally-produced product?

Uranium conference to discuss Labor backflip
A bid by Labor leader Kim Beazley to dump his party's opposition to new uranium mines is expected to be a major talking point at the annual Australian Uranium Conference in Perth this week.
Three hundred uranium experts, including 30 delegates from China, are at the conference.
Uranium Information Centre chief executive and conference delegate Ian Hore-Lacey says a major change in political opinion could lead to Australia exporting more uranium.
With current exports going to Korea, Europe and Japan he says the next two big customers will be China and India.
"China is quadrupling its nuclear capacity by 2020 and it's going to need to import most of the uranium to fuel that," he said.
"India is another possible country but that's much further out.

Draft timber harvesting regulations anger landowners
Landowners in New South Wales are angry at the State Government's draft regulations for timber harvesting in privately-owned forests.
The result of years of debate, the code of practice aims to protect rare timber species, and wildlife and biodiversity, on farms.
But it does not include compensation for landowners.
Robert Dyason, a tree grower in the state's north, believes the draft code is a missed opportunity.
"We could have been presented with a complete package of code, education and compensation for reserved areas, it would have promoted adaptive management with provision for improvement in management as knowledge improved," Mr Dyason said.

Fire and factory closure leaves 100 jobless
Almost 100 jobs will be lost with the closure of a fibre board factory in Tasmania's north.
Carter Holt Harvey has announced it will shut down its Bell Bay plant, which produces the building product MDF.
Operations there were suspended a month ago after a multi-million dollar fire.
Andrew Eastick from Northern Tasmanian Development says it was a difficult decision.
"The plant has always been marginal and one of the difficulties for the plant is the market for MDF has moved on, it produces a material which is only able to be manufactured down to a certain thickness," Mr Eastick said.
"Is the plant able to be re-engineered so that it can produce an MDF material that can attract a premium?

Fungal disease could wipe out WA wheat crops
A disease that can completely wipe out wheat crops appeared for the first time this season in Western Australia.
The fungal disease stripe rust, which can reduce crop yields by up to 90 per cent, has been spotted in the state's south, near Esperance.
Agronomist Phil Smyth says farmers are growing wheat varieties with better resistance to the disease but this outbreak could be similar to the epidemic of two years ago.

Two confirmed cases of Q fever in NSW border city
Victoria's Department of Human Services has confirmed two cases of Q fever in the border city of Wodonga.
A third person is suspected of contracting the disease, which causes heavy flu-like symptoms.
People working with livestock are usually most at risk of the disease, although the two confirmed patients do not work with livestock.
Director of population health in Albury, Tony Kolbe, says it is unusual, but not impossible, for people who do not work with animals to become ill.

Average rainfall expected right across Australia
The Bureau of Meteorology says most of Australia looks set for average rainfall over the next three months, although the north-east could be drier.
The bureau says there is a 60 to 80 per cent chance of below average rain in the region from Daly Waters in the Northern Territory, south to the corner country and across to Rockhampton in Queensland.
Elsewhere there is a 50 per cent chance of at least average rainfall between August and October.

Producing, manufacturing costs higher than expected
The costs of manufacturing goods and growing produce have risen higher than expected, adding more weight to a forecast interest rate rise next week.
Theoretically the big price increases for producing bananas, grains, beef, sheep and dairy products should mean a pay rise for farmers.
But the ANZ bank's chief economist Saul Eslake says the jump in producer prices reflects a lack of supply due to weather conditions, higher fuel prices, and interest rates.
"Drought has constrained grain supplies, the long-term reduction in sheep numbers across Australia has been a factor in rising meat prices, rising beef prices are partly due to the very good prices that Australian producers have been getting overseas and sugar prices have roughly trebled," he said.

Black truffles yields 'fantastic'
The black truffle industry is enjoying its best ever season.
Low yields have plagued growers in recent years but Tim Terry from Tasmanian Truffle Enterprises says his harvest has tripled this season and it is a similar story around Australia.
"There are certainly some very good yields on the mainland and in Western Australia there have been some fantastic yields of much older plantations of course," Mr Terry said.

Suspension of trade talks costing farmers
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says the overnight suspension of world trade talks has cost Australian farmers $1.5 billion in potential new markets.
The G6 group of nations including Australia, Japan, the US and European Union failed to resolve five years of discussions about agricultural trade reform.
Scott Mitchell from the NFF says the US failed to agree to further subsidy cuts, while Europe would not drop its import barriers.
"All Australian agricultural industries are extremely disappointed at the suspension of the WTO [World Trade Organisation] negotiations overnight," Mr Mitchell said.
"This is a huge lost opportunity for Australian farmers to lock in the elimination of export subsidies, to lock in significant cuts in agricultural subsidies being spent around the world and to lock in actual improvements in market access."
Meanwhile Nationals leader Mark Vaile has played down speculation that he will now hand the trade portfolio over to Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran.
"I think that there's still a lot more that can be done, as we've got quite a busy agenda on the bi-lateral front with negotiations well under way with China and Malaysia and the ASEAN [South East Asian Nations] countries and I'm certainly keen to pursue those," Mr Vaile said.
US farmers say they will fight to retain their current level of subsidies, now that the trade talks have stalled.
Lobby group, the US Farm Bureau, says farmers are not prepared to give ground until Europe offers more concessions.
The group's spokesman, Chris Garza, says internal debate will now begin on the next US farm bill due next year, and farmers will attempt to lock in subsidies.
"What we've seen is, as these negotiations have gone on countries like the European Union has requested more and more from the United States to give up," Mr Garza said.
"We feel as an organisation that there's no reason to give up anything at this point. which means we should not make any changes to our farm bill so that when these negotiations do begin again, we're still where we were before, and we still have something to give up if we have to give something up."
America's top trade official says the collapse of global trade talks means the US presidential trade deal authority will now likely expire, before any WTO deal can be saved and sent to the US Congress.
There has been a US push to complete a new world trade deal this year leaving enough time for the US Congress to ratify it before the presidential trade deal authority expires next July, when the body could again amend any deal possibly killing it.
US trade ambassador Susan Schwab says the worst will now likely happen.
"We do not expect to be able to use the current TPA [US Trade Promotion Authority] to enact a Doha Round agreement, if and when one comes together," Ms Schwab said.

Rare butterfly found in Arnhem Land
A rare and endangered butterfly in north-east Arnhem Land is now a bit safer.
The gove crow butterfly was previously thought to live in only four small patches of rainforest, but now a fifth location has been confirmed.
Naturalist Ian Morris says he first saw the butterfly 30 years ago, but was only recently able to confirm it was the gove crow.
"It certainly extends its range by a few hundred kilometres, but probably doesn't stop them being an endangered or threatened species simply because the habitat they live in is so restricted and unique that any disturbance to that could soon cause a crash in their population," he said.

Church offers support to stricken farmers
Farmers in the driest parts of Western Australia are hoping for some divine intervention this week.
Anglican Archbishop of Perth Roger Herft and regional Bishop Tom Wilmot are touring the mid-west and wheat belt, to meet with farmers and offer support.
Bishop Wilmot says the turnout has been huge so far.
"One farmer said that it's a bit like grief or having a death in the family, but there's no burial, because every day you stand on the porch and you look out at the body, as it were," he said.
"I can sympathise with that because these people identify very closely with the land. There is a level of grief there, but as with all grief, it draws families together.

Drought officers angry over job loss
Community drought officers in Victoria's Wimmera region are at a loss to explain why their jobs have been cut.
Three of the four positions are no longer being funded by the Victorian Government, even though the drought is lingering across the region.
Former community drought officer in Yarriambiac Shire, Faye Smith says they met with the Department of Human Services and the State Drought Committee in Horsham yesterday but still do not know if they have a job.
"I was totally amazed," she said.
"To me it just seemed the strangest decision and now more than ever the community strengthening is needed.
"I cannot understand why the State Government would make the decision to wipe out the position when, as most people will tell you, that the situation now is probably as dire as it's ever been."

SA loses rural counsellors
The number of rural financial counsellors in South Australia will be scaled back, following changes to the way the service is provided.
The Federal Government spent two years reviewing the program and opened up tenders for a single, state-based provider in April.
The service will now be run by the newly formed Rural Financial Counselling South Australia.
Spokesman John Voumard says it will allow counsellors to be allocated to areas of need.
"There are periods of demand and they occur at different times in different areas," he said.

Uranium shortage forces commodity price up
As Australia debates the merits of opening up new uranium mines, analysts say a global shortage of the commodity is pushing up prices.
The spot price for uranium has jumped $US2 in the past week to $US47.25 per pound.
ANZ Bank commodity analyst Andrew Harrington says half of the world's nuclear power is currently sourced from recycled nuclear weapons left over from the Cold War.
He says Australia's massive reserves of uranium are in high demand for nuclear powered plants, because recycled uranium is running out.
"Mostly it was to do with the renewed interest in uranium as a commodity, because the recycled uranium from nuclear weapons is starting to decline, so the primary source of uranium coming from mines needs to make up for that shortfall," he said.

Quarantine boost following marine pest find
The increased threat of an exotic marine pest has prompted Northern Territory authorities to strengthen offshore quarantine measures.
The black-striped mussel has been found twice in the past week on seized illegal fishing vessels inside Darwin Harbour.
The pest was found after the boats were moored.
Territory Fisheries spokesman Peter Zeroni says quarantine checks will now be done five nautical miles offshore.
"As a result of events that occurred last week, we have made a decision as an interim measure to now inspect all vessels out at the five nautical mile buoy in open water, where the risk is less," he said.
"The risk at 1.5 is low due to it being an open-water environment ... however, as a precautionary measure we have moved the boats now further out.
"From an NT Fisheries perspective, the risk is manageable where they are. We are concerned about the NT's internal waters, waters within three nautical miles and probably out to 10.
"We have a strong interest in ensuring those waters are free of aquatic pests."

Grain prices rise as US turns to ethanol
The rising cost of fuel in America is having a positive impact on Australian wheat prices, according to an agriculture publication.
More consumers in the US are turning to corn-based ethanol, increasing corn consumption by 15 per cent to 60 million tonnes and boosting prices by up to 20 per cent.
Richard Koch from Profarmer says the US corn price sets the basis for the global feed grain market, which will have spin offs for Australian wheat and canola growers.
"I've seen some analysis that indicates the value of soft commodities in the medium-term could increase six-fold," he said.

AWB legal battle back before court
The legal battle over the future of the oil-for-food inquiry is back in the Federal Court today.
This time a challenge has been initiated by Commissioner Terence Cole, who does not want to participate in the case about AWB's claim to withhold documents from his inquiry.
The Commissioner's lawyers are asking the court to determine the legitimacy of AWB's claim of legal professional privilege over 1,300 documents.

Farmers seek better food label laws for online shopping
Farmers say an oversight by Australia's peak food regulator is allowing fruit and vegetables to be sold on the Internet without new country-of-origin labelling.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) introduced the tougher labelling laws last month after farmers fought for imported food to be clearly identified.
However, with major supermarkets now offering online grocery sales, the rules do not apply.
Brian Bond from the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association says FSANZ should have identified the issue.
"It's obviously been an oversight by Food Standards Australia and New Zealand and it's something that certainly needs to be looked at and if we can plug the gap we should," he said.
"We need sales and I guess this area of sales is going to increase rather than decrease so it's certainly something that needs addressing."
Lydia Buchtmunn from FSANZ says the issue has not been overlooked.
"Actually we've been addressing that for quite a long time we've been looking at the whole labelling standard to look at things perhaps that are home delivered," she said.

US producers weary of resumption in Japan trading
Cattle producers in the United States are not hopeful of a quick resumption of their beef trade to Japan, despite a successful tour of US meat plants by Japanese inspectors.
The beef trade is awaiting confirmation that US beef will again be allowed into Japan after a two-year bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)-related ban.
The ban was lifted late last year but reimposed after early shipments were found to contain traces of spinal cord.
Jay Truitt, from the National Cattlemens Beef Association, thinks many producers and processors might not want to supply Japan again.
"I think there's some excitement, obviously, it's tempered, because history has been a good teacher for us, that we shouldn't get too excited," he said.
"More importantly though, from our perspective, is that we really look at our industry and we begin to now look sincerely at what are the opportunities for us in Japan and they're still quite limited and we're not going to over prepare for it, it's an expensive market for us to function.

No growth predicted for south-west WA pastures
The CSIRO says pasture growth rates in Western Australia's south-west are shaping up to be the worst in nearly 100 years.
New satellite data shows growth rates are expected to be down 60 per cent on last year, due to abnormal weather patterns.
The CSIRO's Dr Steve Gherhardi says, as a result, many farmers have reduced stock numbers to give paddocks a spell.
"Even now, if farmers have had a break, they'd need to make decisions on how long they would want to defer that pasture to ensure that they'll get some growth occurring," he said.

Drought, costs force farmers to cut water usage
The number of irrigated Australian farms has dropped a further 13 per cent, according to a new report by the bureau of statistics.
In the year 2004-05, just over 35,000 Australian farms used irrigation, down 5,000 on the year before.
The report shows less water is being used to grow pasture and rice, although more is going into growing cotton.
Doug Miell from the New South Wales Irrigators Council says the fall is partly due to drought, but also because of high water prices.
He says many irrigators are focusing on crops, which give them a higher return, or selling their water.
"There's obviously a consolidation happening right across agriculture in the irrigation sector, there's no difference in that regard," he said.

Wool companies look at partial integration
The boards of Australia's two peak wool companies are still talking up the industry's future despite now having to look at ways of joining forces without a full merger.
Plans to unit Australian Wool Services (AWS) with Australian Wool Innovation are on hold while the Federal Government decides whether to help AWS pay off a $27 million overseas debt.
Chairman Barry Walker is hopeful the Government will come to the rescue, but says the two companies are looking at how to integrate parts of their organisations anyway.
"There are certainly major savings in running a single company," he said.

Public interest tests urged before hospital closures
The Australian Medical Association (AMA) wants all state governments to introduce public interest tests before downgrading or closing any more public hospitals in rural areas.
The doctors' lobby group says after years of neglect, governments should do whatever it takes to keep country public hospitals open and properly staffed.
AMA rural reference group chairman Dr David Rivett says the test should examine how closures affect the health needs of residents, local employment and the availability of other health services.
"We want to see the impact on the maintenance of skills of the medical workforce factored in, the impact on the health needs of the local communities and that includes the social dislocation they have when they have to travel many miles to seek treatment," he said.
"We want to see the impact of employment on the community when people have to travel with sick children to the cities and give up their jobs for days or weeks, and we want to see the availability of alternative resources all factored into the equation."

US lamb market set to slow down
There is a warning for lamb producers today that growth in the US market is set to slow down over the next year.
Sales of our lamb to the US grew by 28 per cent between 2004 and 2005 to become Australia's highest value market worth $327 million.
But Shane O'Hara from the Australian Lamb Company says exports are under pressure from similar factors to here, like competition from cheaper meats like chicken.
"We've seen some higher fuel costs, that's having a big pinch on disposable income," he said.

US blames Europe for collapse of trade talks
The blame game has started following the collapse of the Doha world trade talks.
Key nations have failed to agree on how to cut farm and industrial tariffs, and US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns is blaming Europe's refusal to let more beef in.
But Andrew McCallum from Meat and Livestock Australia says the trade talks did not detail individual agricultural products.
"I think what Johanns has done has just highlighted the beef issue as an example," he said.

Fruit wholesaler says banana returns increasing
A leading Queensland fruit wholesaler says he is surprised that bananas are being blamed for a higher than expected rise in inflation.
Economists blame skyrocketing banana prices, as well as fuel costs, for the 1.6 per cent jump in the June quarter Consumer Price Index.
More than 90 per cent of the Australian banana crop was wiped out earlier this year when cyclone Larry hit far north Queensland.
Peter Kedwell from the Brisbane Markets says while volume is down, returns are actually up.
"Bananas [on] average used to be around $15 to $20 a box, now it's $150 a box," he said.

Livestock transporter wants more rationalisation
There are calls today for more rationalisation and enforcement of legislation in the livestock transport sector.
Jim Cooper is the departing owner of the nation's largest livestock trucking fleet, Road Trains of Australia.
He has just sold his livestock fleet to another operator and believes it was a necessary step.
Mr Cooper will keep his other transport business and concentrate on the growing resources sector.
"The way the mining sector's regulated ... yes we can work within the legislation and compliance within the mining industry," he said.
"I certainly see some of the services for the remote area cattle haulage pulling back. I think a lot of the road trains, whether they are RTA or Hampton's, operate very much like a taxi rank.

Trip may have cleared up river diversion concerns
Local Aboriginal people may now be more open to the idea of expanding a Northern Territory lead and zinc mine.
Xstrata is currently seeking environmental approvals to move the McArthur River five and a half kilometres, so its mine can become an open-cut operation.
The company recently took a group of traditional owners to a coal mine in Victoria to see first hand what river diversion involves.
John Moriarty, the chairman of the Borroloola Community Reference Group, thinks the trip might have cleared up some concerns.

Farmer hopes assistance package will keep town afloat
The Western Australian Government has announced an assistance package for farmers in some of the State's most severely drought-affected regions.
Farmer Glenn Thomas was one of 150 locals at a dry season crisis meeting in the wheatbelt town of Mullewa yesterday.
Although details of the package are not yet known, Mr Thomas hopes it will help to keep his community afloat through the worst farming year he has ever known.
"There's different situations throughout the shires. There's many in the outlying areas that have really only had one good season in the last five or six and, really, that's just not enough to get back on your feet," he said.

Mental health concerns switch to young people in rural areas
The National Mental Health Initiative has raised concerns about the lack of information available about how the drought has affected young people in rural Australia.
Craig Hodges from beyondblue says the last survey was carried out in the late 1990s and data is up to 10-years-old.
He says the spin-offs from the drought are significant, with about a quarter of young people affected by depression, anxiety and other mental health issues.
"We only get this data every five to 10 years and the last one that was taken was in the late 90s which showed there was roughly one in four young women experiencing depression and one in six young men experienced depression," he said.
"They see what is happening with their parents, how parents respond to tough times on the farm and that also may mean there's less disposable income so that might mean they can't do the things they once did, so the spin-offs are quite significant."
The drought is also affecting young peoples choices at school.
At Redbank Catholic College in the west of central New South Wales, 68 students from across the state are studying agriculture in their final years.
Just a few say they will go onto work in the sector.

AWB announces restructure
Wheat exporter AWB has announced a further restructure to improve transparency but says it is not a result of the oil-for-food scandal.
Under the plan AWB International, which holds the licence for the single desk for exports, will be further separated from the company's corporate division.
It will have an independent board and management team, and its own governance and committee structure.
AWB chairman Brendan Stewart says the change is a result of feedback from grower groups and growers and is not a knee-jerk reaction to the Cole inquiry.
"These changes that we are making have absolutely nothing to do with the Cole inquiry, these are changes that we have initiated 18 months ago," he said.
"They have been a long time coming, they have been a process of detailed analysis and impact so that we delivered on the key promise that we gave to growers."
Mr Stewart rejects any suggestions from grower groups that it is too little too late.
"I don' think that's the case at all," he said.
Grains analyst Malcolm Bartholomaeus says there are major flaws in the restructure because the wheat sales division will not be part of AWB International and still will not be accountable enough.
"One of the implications is that the situation we've seen with the Iraq inquiry and the scandal there, and potentially the allegations of other payments being made in other market places, basically that could still happen again and put the single desk at risk with no control over the situation by AWB," he said.
AWB has rejected the suggestions.
Meanwhile AWB has cut its estimated before-tax profit by between 20 to 25 per cent.
The company says the drought has led to lower merchandise and fertiliser sales, and results have also been affected by difficult ongoing trading conditions and volatile world markets.
Profits for the year ending September 30 are expected to drop from a forecast $184.5 million to around $140 million.

Wool companies sign merger MOU
Australia's two peak wool companies will press on with a merger, despite an outstanding $27 million debt.
Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) and Australian Wool Services (AWS) have been in long-running talks about a merger, but the stumbling block has been AWS's outstanding debt to a UK-based superannuation fund.
The two companies have now signed a memorandum of understanding to look at the legal and financial implications of integration with work to start immediately.
The Federal Government had been approached to help pay off the debt, but the companies now say they will work together to solve the issue.

Producers told not to panic over Japanese beef decision
Japan has lifted its ban on US beef but the experts say Australian producers do not need to panic just yet.
Japan will only accept US beef under 20 months of age and from a limited number of accredited meat plants.
Meat and Livestock Australia says Australian exports to Japan should remain steady at around 390,000 tonnes a year.
Malcolm Foster from the Australian Lotfeeders Association does not think the US will pose any short-term threat and says other markets are available anyway.
"The alternate markets to Japan are obviously other Asian markets, in particular Korea, Taiwan and those markets, although markets in the Middle East and even markets in Russia are starting to open up now for Australian exporters," he said.
"So there are other markets but Japan will always be a very important one for us."
US cattlemen are upset over the tough restrictions imposed by Tokyo.
The National Cattlemen's Beef Association argues Japan's partial reopening is just a first step toward full resumption of trade worth $US1.4 billion, before America lost the market to Australia following a 2003 mad cow case.
The association's Jay Truitt says Tokyo's limits on US cattle age and number of plants that can ship is far too restrictive.
"Everyone of these restrictions adds cost to the system - that's not what we want," he said.

Food prices hit 15-year high
Australia has posted its biggest increase in food prices in 15 years.
Rabobank says the figures, which are being blamed for a big jump in inflation, show an 8.3 per cent rise in food costs.
But head of food and agribusiness research Bill Cordingley says the rise was mainly driven by soaring banana prices, with fruit prices up a stunning 52 per cent for the June quarter.
Prices rose for citrus fruit, apples, melons and strawberries, due to consumer demand for an alternative to bananas.

AWB restructure not enough, says US lobby group
America's peak grains lobby group claims a major restructure announced by wheat exporter AWB is just for show.
AWB has announced a multi-million dollar plan to separate its export arm AWB International from its corporate division.
As part of a push for better corporate governance, AWB International will continue to manage the single desk for wheat exports, but have its own management team and board.
Rebecca Coleman from US Wheat Associates says it still wants the AWB's monopoly on exports removed.
"US wheat does not think that it is going to make a difference, we think that it's just another show game and a shifting of boxes," she said.
"US Wheat's concerns has always been the power of the monopoly board, the way that they function in distorting trade and so a shifting of boxes around doesn't change the monopoly structure."
Australia's peak body, the Grains Council, will not comment on AWB's restructure plan.
In the wake of yesterday's announcement, AWB shares fell by 33 cents but recovered to finish at $3.85, just five cents below the opening price.
There has been little movement on the company's share price today, and Austock Agribusiness analyst Paul Jensz says the market has reacted positively.
"With this restructuring I think investors probably look at it as a first small step of a long road of recovery," he said.
"Investors broadly are saying that this level around $3.50-$3.90 is the bottom of AWB at this point." 

Crop forecasts
Winter crop forecasts in the eastern states have had a remarkable turnaround due to recent widespread rain.
Grain handler, Graincorp, says early prospects for this season were dismal, but after late breaks in June and July, it is expecting receivals of around 9 million tonnes.
Managing director Tom Keene says that is on par with the past two seasons.
"Victoria around 3 million tonnes and around 5 million tonnes in New South Wales, Queensland we would expect to get around 1 million tonnes," he said.

Biofuels Institute to be based in SA
Alternative feedstocks to supply the growing alternative fuels industry will be the focus of a new federally-funded Australian Biofuels Institute.

Ad campaign to highlight abuse of migrant visa program
The union movement has launched a campaign to highlight misuse of the skilled migrant visa program.
Under the 457 program, employers like abattoirs can import skilled workers when they can not be found locally.
Unions have now launched a $300,000 ad campaign highlighting abuses of the scheme and Graeme Bird from the Meat Industry Employees Union says they want action.

Govt urged to stop river environmental flows
Water shortages in western Victoria are now so severe that farmers are asking the State Government to halt environmental flows into rivers.
With reservoirs only 7 per cent full, farmers are facing the prospect of no available water to fill house dams and paying to cart the water they need for livestock and crop spraying.
President of the Victorian Farmers Federation Simon Ramsay says if there is not enough rain in August, water for rivers should be re-allocated to farms and homes.
"The 2,859 megalitres that sits under the bulk entitlement for environmental flows would be better used and have a greater impact to provide water for stock and domestic use, if needed, rather than the sort of nil effect it will have flushing down the Wimmera River," he said.
Meanwhile Australia needs five years of average rainfall to rebuild water levels in irrigation storages.
That is the view of Professor Wayne Meyer, chief scientist at the Co-operative Research Centre for Irrigation Futures.
Irrigators have not had full water allocations since 2001 and Professor Meyer says ongoing low rainfall has reduced the amount of water available by a third.
"If you look at the storage situation it will take several years of even average rainfall to get our storages back up to those, for example, that we had at the end of the 90s, early part of 2000," he said.

McGauran joins push to lift ban on GM crops
There is growing pressure on the states to lift their bans on commercial trials of genetically modified (GM) crops.
State governments have powers over land which they have used to impose the bans.
Now federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran has joined farm groups in calling for the moratoria to be lifted, saying there are environmental and economic benefits from the technology.
"I believe the states' opposition to genetically modified crops is purely philosophical or ideological, it makes no economic or environmental sense," he said.
"Farmers should make the decision for themselves based on their reading of the marketplace.

New patrol boat to join illegal fishing fight
A new Navy patrol boat designed to monitor Australia's northern waters for illegal fishing will be commissioned at Port Pirie in South Australia tomorrow.
The Armidale class ship, to be called HMAS Pirie, is the latest in a new fleet of ships dedicated to border security operations.
Lieutenant Commander Kimbal Dunsmore, commanding officer of the new vessel, says the Navy is now much better equipped to intercept and board illegal fishing boats.
"These ships have cutting edge technology. They are a very, very complex machine that offer better endurance, better habitability, longer time on task and a better capability," he said.

Abattoir fish project likely to expand
The first attempt at growing fish in waste water from abattoirs has been successfully carried out in South Australia.
The lamb exporter, Tatiara Meat Company, uses about 1 million litres of water a day in its operations.
Most of it is recycled, but waste water held in storage ponds is now being used to grow goldfish, barramundi and carp, purifying the water so it can be used to grow fodder for livestock.
Environmental officer Fil Farina says the project is likely to expand.

Qld police investigate crop sabotage
North Queensland police are investigating the sabotage of crops in the horticulture district of Bowen.
Crops have been deliberately poisoned on four farms, causing a million dollars' damage to paddocks of watermelons, beans, tomatoes and capsicums.
Bowen company Queensland Seedlings lost thousands of plants in a similar attack in 2002, and no one has ever been charged.
Spokesman Andrew Paterson supplies seedlings to some of the affected farmers and says the damage has created a lot of fear and uncertainty.
"Basically someone out there, or persons, or person, I don't know, is holding us all to ransom," he said.

PM visits cyclone Larry affected communities
Prime Minister John Howard is in north Queensland today to meet victims of cyclone Larry, visiting communities between Innisfail and Tully.
Banana growers who had their crops wiped out will ask the PM to extend labour support schemes.

US drought hits sheep flock
The drought in the United States has not just hit the grain crop.
The latest US Department of Agriculture figures have shown the nation's sheep flock has fallen by 30,000 to 7.7 million head, denting hopes that numbers were rebuilding.
Meat and Livestock Australia says that is likely to increase US reliance on imports from countries like Australia for a number of years.

Qld shearer wins Diamond Shears comp
A shearer from southern inland Queensland has won the the Diamond Shears competition, run for the first time in five years at Longreach over the weekend.
Once regarded as the most prestigious shearing event in the southern hemisphere, organisers have battled insurance problems but managed to attract shearers from three states and New Zealand for this year's event.
Winner Laurie Bateman says he hopes it will help entice more young people into the wool industry.
"I think if we can keep these sport shearing competitions going, we may be able to entice a few more rural people out of the towns to come into our industry," he said.
"I can see it being the best show in Australia down the track. Anybody can shear a sheep or come into a shearing shed, wool handle, press, class, if you are fit and keen enough to get out there and earn a bit of money."

Meat industry agreement to tackle skilled visa abuse
The Australian Meat Industry Council is trying to stamp out abuse of the program to import skilled migrants to fill labour shortages.
Unions claim some employers are breaching the rules by underpaying workers, using skilled workers to perform unskilled jobs and not providing proper training.
The Immigration Department has frozen visa applications until the concerns are addressed.
Chief executive Kevin Cottrell says a labour agreement is being negotiated to ensure all sectors stay within the law.
