Bushfires spark concerns for koala population
Fears are held for the biggest koala population in New South Wales, which is under threat from bushfires in the state's north-west.
The state's new wildlife rescue service has travelled today to the Pilliga region to assess the koalas, with Taronga and Western Plains Zoo on standby to accept any injured animals.

Japanese consul-general helps mark rice crop anniversary
The Japanese consul general has helped to mark the 100th anniversary of Australia's first rice crop.
Shisei Kaku has unveiled a memorial sign near Swan Hill in north-west Victoria.
He says he is proud to commemorate the time when Japanese farmer Joe Takasuka first planted a crop on flood prone land on the Murray River.

Dairy farmers attitudes to environment changing
A new survey has revealed a noticeable change in Australian dairy farmers' attitudes towards the environment.
More than 1,200 dairy farmers were asked about their natural resource management practices and the results show producers are considering their impact on the wider community.
Dairy Australia's Cathy Phelps says while most farmers acknowledge there is room for improvement, they are committed to protecting the environment.
"It's partly about having that social license to farm and ensuring that the industry is well accepted in the community," she said.
"I think it's also the fact that the industry has taken a lead role in driving these programs and ensuring that they're farmer led.

Senator confident of support for PM's wheat export model
An influential Liberal senator says he is confident the Prime Minister will put forward a model for the future of wheat export marketing which most government politicians and wheat growers will be able to support.
New South Wales Senator Bill Heffernan says no government politicians are calling for the complete scrapping of the single desk.
Senator Heffernan says the model will retain the advantages for wheat growers that having a single desk gives them in a world market distorted by different trade barriers and subsidies.
"While Australia's wheat farmers to some extent have been betrayed by the past, we've got to look to the future and offer opportunities that open up the market to growers and not necessarily to punters, carpetbaggers and wheat traders," he said.

Grain storage
Meanwhile unusually high levels of grain are in storage around the country.
The latest Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) figures show more than 13 million tonnes of wheat, barley and other feed grains are currently held by bulk storage companies and grain handlers.
Karen Connaughton from the ABS says the numbers are boosted from last year's bumper harvest.
"This is the first time that we've done this collection since December 2004 so we have no previous data to compare with," she said.
"But what people need to remember is that the 2005-06 harvest was almost a record high harvest.

Rudd wins Labor leadership
The new federal Labor frontbench will not be decided until Thursday after the appointment of new Opposition Leader Kevin Rudd this morning.
Mr Rudd defeated Kim Beazley by 10 votes to take out the ballot, 49-39.

Canadian canola a slap in the face for Aust farmers: Greenpeace
Greenpeace says a shipment of Canadian canola which arrived in Newcastle yesterday is a slap in the face for Australian farmers.
The environmental group is appealing to the major supermarkets and food processors not to use the genetically modified (GM) canola, imported by grains trader Cargill.
Spokeswoman Louise Sales says consumers do not want to eat GM foods and the big food chains should respect their wishes.
"[We need] to build consumer pressure to make companies like Woolworths and Coles refuse to take the shipment," she said.
"If you look at the figures and the predicted canola crops [it is] 400,000 tonnes and domestic demand is only 100,000 to 115,000 tonnes, so we've got ample supplies to meet domestic demand."

Historic cattle property sells for $27m
One of Australia's most historic cattle properties has been sold for a reported $27 million.
Goonoo Goonoo was established under an 1833 grant from King George IV to the Australian Agricultural Company.
The 5,400 hectare farm near Tamworth, in New South Wales, was owned by the Colonial Agricultural Fund, which was bought out by central Queensland cattleman Peter Hughes and partner Bill Scott earlier this year.
It has now been sold to the Macquarie Goodman Group.
Mr Hughes has also sold the Trevenna Downs aggregation near Goondiwindi and says the properties did not suit his focus on the northern cattle industry.
"It doesn't fit with the operation we are dealing with in north and central Queensland," he said.
"In a big pastoral situation I find the economy of scale is not there.
"They are wonderful family places, very good for families and private individuals.
"When you get into the bigger scale, you have got to employ whatever you have got to employ to make those big places run.

Dalby stock horse sale fetches record prices
Records have been broken at Australia's biggest stock horse sale in southern Queensland.
New records were set for all categories at the annual Dalby sale with the highest price of $70,000 paid for a mare by well-known sire Warrenbri Romeo.
That was $5,000 higher than last year's record price and livestock agent Mick Cuskelly says the sale made nearly $2 million altogether.
"We're a little bit back in numbers which you always get in these tough seasons and we had quite a few withdrawals before the sale, a few people couldn't make it, couldn't get away form their properties with the drought in the country," he said.

Stock Horse Society set to open US branch
The Australian stock horse is on the verge of making it big overseas.
The Stock Horse Society expects to open a branch in the United States next year to target Australia's biggest growing market for the stock horse.
Society spokesman Cooper Wright says the Americans want to become more involved in the breed.

Lamb slaughter levels reach 25 year high
Lamb slaughter numbers are at their highest levels in more than 25 years.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) says total sheep and lamb slaughter numbers have risen for the tenth consecutive month to more than 3.2 million.
Mutton production was also up.
Nigel Gibson from the ABS says the figures reflect the impact of the drought.
"We had 1.7 million lambs processed for the month which is around 200,000 more for the same month than the four or five previous years," he said.
"[It is a] very much higher figure than what we'd normally expect to see.

Calf sales held early
The drought has forced Victoria's annual new year weaner calf sales to be held earlier than usual.
The sales usually allow breeders to present their best beef cattle to buyers from across Victoria and New South Wales.
More than 2,000 cattle were sold in Wangaratta on Friday, with a pen of 20 angus steers making the top price of $460 each.
Farmers say they were pleasantly surprised with prices paid.
Robin Gibb from Milawa says the bigger steers made over $400 and the smaller draft sold for just under.
"They are better than I expected on the day and the conditions actually," he said.
Graham Batten from Moyhu sold two pens of steers and says he is "more than happy".

Dairy Australia appoints drought coordinators to help farmers
Dairy Australia is taking further measures to ensure farmers are looked after during the drought.
In Victoria, local drought coordinators have been appointed to help troubled farmers connect to drought relief and financial services.
Gippsland coordinator John Hutchison says it is another way of farmers helping each other out.
"I think Dairy Australia are trying to be proactive and be seen by the dairy community that they are actually understanding the difficulties that farmers are under," he said.

Red meat producers warned about white meat threat
Red meat producers are being warned that their biggest overseas competition might not be from traditional export rivals Brazil and the United States.
Jeff Grant, chairman of Meat and Wool New Zealand, says producers are facing a bigger threat from pork, poultry and fish.
He says consumers in developing nations are changing their diets to include more protein but white meat could become their first choice.
"That shift in terms of their diets means that for beef or milk in the dairy industry has a very good potential going forward," he said.

Qld mandarins to be supplied at Beijing Olympics
Mandarins from Queensland will be served during the 2008 Beijing Olympics.
The export win comes just months after the first shipment of honey murcott mandarins was sent to China under strict new quarantine protocols.
It is welcome news for growers who lost fruit in recent hail storms.
But Graham McCosker from the grower co-operative, Gayndah Packers, says the biggest challenge will be meeting demand.
"It's just astronomical, we just came back from China a few months ago, we met a buyer from Beijing," he said.
"She was very interested, she said, 'I will buy, I will buy' [and] she said, 'I would like to take 300-500 containers per year'," he said.

China deal saves woollen mill
After facing an uncertain future 18 months ago, a century-old Tasmanian woollen mill is making a comeback.
Launceston's Waverley Woollen Mill had been under administration with debts of more than $1.5 million.
But the new managers have struck a deal to sell premium woollen blankets to China.
Managing director Bruce Grant says the company has had to look beyond domestic markets.
"So we had to investigate opportunities overseas and we have been gradually having small shipments to various overseas countries," he said.

German fan club raises RFDS funds
A German-based fan club of the 1980s TV series, The Flying Doctors, have raised $25,000 for the real Royal Flying Doctor Service (RFDS).
The German RFDS fan club began 11 years ago after members fell in love with the series which is still screening in Europe.
President Renate Kaldenhoff says money is raised through memberships and selling photographs signed by the stars of the show.
"It must be nearly 25,000, I always say my fans are really great," she said.

Barley single desk marketing system abolished in SA
After 10 years of operation, South Australia's single desk marketing system for barley will be abolished.
Despite a majority of South Australian growers supporting a single desk in a open ballot conducted earlier this year, the decision has been overturned.
Barley marketing will be overseen by an independent authority known as the Essential Services Commission over the next three years.
After that, the market will be completely deregulated.
This has been the result of a four month review, pushed by the State Government which has been denied national competition payments of up to $9 million in the last three years due to lack of competition.

Winter crop harvest down 60pc: ABARE
The latest predictions from the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) show the nation's winter crop harvest is 60 per cent down on last year.
With the driest August to October period since 1900, ABARE is also warning summer plantings will suffer, particularly rice and cotton.
Chief commodity analyst Dr Terry Sheals says any grain and fodder stocks held on farm will become increasingly important.
"I would expect the winter grains harvest, a lot of that harvest will be held on farms in those areas worst affected by the drought," he said.
"The report confirms the seriousness of the situation.
"We are looking at the lowest winter grains crop in 10 years, since the 1994-95 drought to be precise.
"The crop's estimated to be about 15.5 million tonnes."
Meanwhile as expected, drought conditions have intensified across eastern and southern Australia.
The National Climate Centre says there has been a distinct turn for the worse since August, due to the lack of late winter and spring rains.

Destructive aphid found in Yarra Valley
The destructive phylloxera aphid has been found for the first time in Victoria's prestigious Yarra Valley wine region.
Until now the aphid, which attacks the roots of vines and causes them to die, has been restricted to the state's north-east.
A small vineyard has been quarantined and neighbouring properties warned about the outbreak.
Dr Patrick Sharkey from the Department of Primary Industries says he is hopeful phylloxera will not spread into the big wine regions in the state's west.
"We've actually put special control areas in there to stop vines and bins, and machinery moving in there without cleaning," he said.
"That, along with the soil type which is not conducive to the spread of phylloxera, has helped keep those vineyards free.

Authorities inspect commercial banana farms
Authorities are inspecting commercial banana farms in northern New South Wales today after the discovery of the disease 'bunchy top' north of Lismore.
The disease has not been seen in the Richmond Valley since it was eradicated in the 1970s.
A commercial grower found the disease on his farm last week.

Academic suggests water allocations for city residents
There is a call today for governments to consider water allocations for city dwellers and businesses.
Mike Young, a professor at the University of Adelaide, says there should be a minimum supply of water that is cheap and protected, with extra water available to everyone on an open market.
Professor Young says the move would drive up water prices during droughts reducing shortages and generating more money for water infrastructure, desalination and recycling projects.
"If we start having high prices in urban areas then they'll start actually making the water that they need themselves and actually recycling and doing all those other things," he said.

Group seeks to inform Indigenous communities about NWI
A new group wants to help remote Aboriginal communities to learn more about the National Water Initiative (NWI).
The Indigenous Water Policy Group wants to break down barriers by translating policy into traditional languages.
Executive officer Joe Morrison says remote communities are still largely unaware of the implications of water trading and native title rights regarding water.
"We think that the native title process and the NWI only talks about customary use, and customary use as being for non-commercial purposes," he said.

Woolworths to pay more for beef in WA
Woolworths says it will lift the prices it pays for beef in Western Australia to help farmers through the drought.
Prices paid to Western Australian suppliers will increase by a minimum of two cents a kilogram.
The supermarket chain has denied the increase is linked to an investigation by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission into meat prices.
Tim D'arcy from the Pastoralists and Graziers Association says it is a welcome step.
"It's a very minimal increase," he said.

Hay reserved for drought assistance stolen
Hay to feed livestock on drought-affected farms in Victoria has been stolen.
Melbourne Water is cutting grass in its reserves to help to send to farmers in drought-declared areas and was planning to donate around 700 round bales.
Victorian Farmers Federation drought coordinator Brenda McLachlan says thieves have taken hay worth $10,000 that had been cut and left to dry.
"The hay is allocated to needy farmers and so it is very disappointing for us," she said.

Plantation timber companies offer agistment, water access to farmers
Plantation timber companies are opening their gates to assist farmers in drought-stricken areas, offering cheap agistment and access to stored water.
Across southern South Australia and western Victoria, bluegum plantation company Timbercorp is allowing farmers to pump water from dams to water livestock.
And Great Southern Plantations has offered lower rates for agisting sheep amid its bluegums.
Spokesman David Ikin says the company benefits as well.
"The sheep feed on grasses and so forth that are growing between the trees keeping down the undergrowth," he said.
"[It is] obviously from the farmers' point of view, a valuable source of feed through what's been a tough time.
"We've got about 30,000 sheep altogether now grazing on our properties.

Horticulturalists fear loopholes in proposed code of conduct
Sections of the horticulture industry say they still have concerns about the mandatory code of conduct due to be tabled in Federal Parliament.
The code is designed to improve transparency between growers and wholesalers but Ian Hay from Cherrygrowers of Australia says many producers have not had a chance to see the draft legislation.
He says many are worried that there will be too many loopholes for buyers operating outside the central markets.
"The hard part is that when things get tabled in Parliament they can quite easily become law and we have no recourse to change it," he said.

Rain hampers blueberry harvest
Australia's major blueberry producing area on the north coast of New South Wales is battling the problem of too much rain during harvest.
Cool and wet conditions have interrupted picking and one producer says his crop is down 20 per cent on forecast production.
Ridley Bell from Mountain Blue Orchards near Lismore says fruit rot is a problem in the wet.
"We had one period there of nine days when we couldn't get in to pick because of rain and the fruit starts to go soft and you have a problem as to know whether to pick that fruit," he said.

'Slots' may accelerate fires, says researcher
A bushfire researcher says slots or super dry air which reaches the earth's surface from a high altitude may have accelerated some of Australia's worst fires.
Dr Graham Mills is investigating the phenomenon in relation to the fatal bushfire on South Australia's Eyre Peninsula in 2005 and the Canberra fires of 2003.
He says satellite imagery has revealed a dry slot moving towards Canberra on the day the blaze hit the city.
"My hope would be that we would have some hours of warning for at least some of these events," he said.

Australian cattle trade campaign under way in Indonesia
A big push is under way to step up the live cattle trade between northern Australia and Asia.
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) is running a major campaign in the Indonesian capital of Jakarta this month, funded by the cattle transaction levy.
Spokesman Mike Hayward says 30 supermarkets will feature cooking demonstrations, recipe cards and giveaways.
"Overall, sales will increase from around about the 650 mark (650,000 cattle) up to over 750,000-800,000 head," he said.
"Probably in the five year period, back up towards 1 million (cattle exported).
"I think it's tens of years, you know there's 200 odd million people up here, it's a growing economy, people are aspiring to getting out of the wet markets into the modern retailers, into the malls.

Wheat export changes may compromise national pool: AWB
Wheat exporter AWB says a lack of clarity in the Federal Government's changes to the wheat export system could compromise the national pool.
In the wake of the Cole inquiry, the Government will take control of AWB's veto power over wheat exports for six months while it discusses the future of the single desk.
AWB says the change will prevent the company from forecasting future earnings.
Managing director Gordon Davis says he will meet with Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran to discuss the impact on growers who have already delivered wheat to the national pool.
"Under the previous obligations, AWBI had the ability to veto exports if it considered they weren't in the interest of the national pool," he said.
"In these transitional arrangements, the Minister will have an obligation to make decisions in the public interest.
"The arrangements are very complex as they currently are and there's a range of interests that need to be satisfied in any discussions."

Vaile
Deputy Prime Minister Mark Vaile says the Government will not allow Australian wheat exports to compete against each other in overseas markets.
The Government will decide which companies are allowed to export wheat for the next six months, but AWB will not have to apply for an export permit.
Mr Vaile wants the Government to gauge the views of grain grower organisations and wheat farmers before any decisions are made on the future of the export system.
"We initially need to have a discussion with those groups to draw together the points of view to probably develop an options paper going forward, then that needs to be broadly discussed across the industry," he said.
"I think that at a point in this process the best thing that we can do as a Government is communicate directly with growers."

WA growers
Meanwhile the decision to remove AWB's veto is expected to have the biggest impact on Western Australian growers, with many warehousing their wheat this harvest.
But growers in the west have mixed feelings.
"I think it was a good decision because there was a stalemate and I think it'll be beneficial to WA wheat growers, the ones that have warehoused their wheat," one grower said.
"It also gives protection to the farmers who have delivered into the pool."
"Stripping the right of veto from the AWB this year, in an exceptional drought year and given to Mr McGauran could be fraught with danger," another grower said.
"Before I allocate my wheat I want to know that CBH (Co-operative Bulk Handling) has got a realistic chance of extracting a $20 or $30 a tonne premium," a third wheat grower said.
"If they have, well then that's probably where the wheat will go.
"It's just on a price thing, there's no loyalty left, I don't think."

CBH to renew export application
The Government's decision has opened the door for the CBH group to re-submit a rejected application to export wheat.
Four bids by the WA-based grain handler to send wheat to its mills in Asia have been vetoed by AWB in the past two years.
CBH chief executive Imre Mencshelyi says the company is likely to make a new attempt within days.
"I think it is a significant first step in the changing environment that we currently find ourselves in, it is our intention to re-submit our application to export 2 million tonnes of wheat to our flour mills in Asia," he said.
"Once the guidelines and details of the new power of veto become clear, I think that's important for us to understand exactly what [the] Government means by this decision."

Graincorp welcomes AWB changes
In the east, Graincorp chairman Don Taylor has welcomed the change, but says he ultimately wants the single desk opened up to competition.
"I think there is an opportunity for east coast growers to benefit from those changes, but it depends on the market circumstances at the particular time," he said.

Barley growers divided over market deregulation
Barley growers in South Australia are at odds over plans to deregulate the state's barley market.
A review has recommended the single desk held by ABB Grain be phased out over the next three years, despite a ballot of growers showing overwhelming support for the current system.
Talkback callers to the ABC have been mixed in their response.
"I just can't comprehend that concept, I think we're in for a big loss with our barley industry if this new concept goes ahead," one caller said.
"Well what a big day, December 5, 2006, the end of the stupid single desk for barley in South Australia," another caller said.

NFF backs calls for climate change action
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) has joined calls for early action to tackle climate change.
Members of the NFF's policy council have voted to become part of the Australian Business Roundtable on Climate Change.
President David Crombie says the nation's farming bodies need to involved in efforts to address climate change because of the impact it will have on agriculture.
His calls come as the Federal Government confirms that Australia's greenhouse gas emissions are set to rise by 22 per cent by 2020.
The bleak news is contained in its State of the Environment report, released today in Canberra.
The report also confirms there has been five years of lower than average rainfall across most of eastern Australia and that Perth's water supply catchments are yielding half as much water as they did in the 70s.
Committee chairman Associate Professor Bob Beeton says things will get worse before they get better.
"Some of the heritage properties may decline, some biodiversity may decline, river health may continue at a very low level and the CO2 levels obviously continue to increase," he said.
"The amount of energy use in Australia is still increasing and we need to figure out what we're going to do about that."
Meanwhile, the energy sector says managing climate change will be its greatest challenge for the next few decades.
The Energy Futures Forum has released a report which says future investment will hinge of the industry's response to climate change.
But forum member Tony Wood says developing countries will have to make an effort as well.
"No-one would suggest that Australia should act unilaterally forever," he said.
"(A) we would just damage our own economy and (b), we wouldn't solve the problem of climate change anyway, so there's no doubt we require a global solution.

Labor senator predicted to take agriculture post
Labor's outgoing agriculture spokesman expects Tasmanian Senator Kerry O'Brien to be the frontrunner for the portfolio.
Gavan O'Connor has agreed to step down after the appointment of Kevin Rudd to the party leadership.
A frontbench ballot will be held tomorrow and Mr O'Connor says there are several candidates with experience in agriculture.
"Senator O'Brien has been a participant in the Senate Rural and Regional Affairs Committee over a long period of time and knows many of the key players in the industry and others," he said.

Meatworks struggle to cope with livestock influx
Meatworks in northern Tasmania are working overtime to cope with a big influx of livestock due to the dry conditions.
Tasmanian Quality Meats spokesman Brian Oliver at Cressy says farmers are becoming increasingly desperate to get rid of stock.
The small plant is processing 2,500 sheep and 2,000 lambs a week and Mr Oliver says there is at least a month-long wait to get stock through.
"We are just struggling to keep in front, we are working six days a week and we are just looking at putting in an afternoon shift in the boning room to try and move some more numbers," he said.

Green light given to saleyards development
After years of delays, the Western Australian Government has given the go-ahead to a major development to replace the ageing Midland saleyards on Perth's outskirts.
The livestock industry has been frustrated by the delays and cost blow-outs for the proposed Muchea yards.
Although there is still no clear time frame or cost estimate, industry representative Malcolm Edward says he is pleased to hear it is heading in the right direction.
"In the past I think industry was concerned about replacing Midland, but knowing that the other regional centres needed upgrading or replacing, it had been the wish that we'd get a total approach to the whole thing," he said.

Territory pastoralists hopeful of receiving drought assistance
There are new hopes that drought-hit pastoralists in the Northern Territory will receive federal assistance.
The Northern Territory Cattlemen's Association and the Territory Minister for Primary Industry Chris Natt have met with Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran to seek help.
Association president Roy Chisholm says although they have been knocked back twice, he is hopeful that southern producers will receive exceptional circumstances aid.
"Now there is a slightly different criteria," he said.

Centenarian maintains enthusiasm for farm life
She may be about to celebrate her 100th birthday but the Hunter Valley's Harriet Madden has not lost her enthusiasm for farm life.
For most of her life, Mrs Madden has been a dairy farmer with her late brother Len.
Despite enduring tough times and drought, Mrs Madden says she is now enviously eyeing off a farm that is for sale next door.
"And if I had my way, if I had the money, I'd buy that now," she said.
"They only want $3,000 for it, it's a bit much when you're on the pension.

NASA sees evidence suggesting liquid water on Mars
Images taken by NASA's Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft suggest the presence of liquid water on the Martian surface.
It is a tantalising find for scientists wondering if the Red Planet ever has harboured life.
The orbiting US spacecraft allowed scientists to detect changes in the walls of two Martian craters that may have been caused by the recent flow of water, a team of researchers say in a paper appearing in the journal Science.
Scientists previously had established that two forms of water - ice at the poles and water vapour - exist on Mars, but liquid water is crucial to nurture life.
The scientists compared images of the Martian surface taken seven years apart and found the existence of 20 newly formed craters caused by impact from space debris as well as the evidence suggesting liquid water trickling down crater walls.
"These observations give the strongest evidence to date that water still flows occasionally on the surface of Mars," Michael Meyer, lead scientist for NASA's Mars Exploration Program, said in a statement.
The paper says water seems to have flowed down two gullies in the past few years, even though liquid water cannot remain long on the planet's frigid, nearly airless surface because it would rapidly freeze or evaporate.
This seemed to support the notion that liquid water may exist close enough to the planet's surface in some places that it can seep out from time to time.
The scientists proposed that water could remain in liquid form long enough on the surface to transport debris before freezing.
The two bright new deposits are each several hundred metres long.
They cited a possible alternative explanation that these features were caused by movement of dry dust down a slope. 

Life on Mars?
Scientists long have wondered whether life ever existed on Mars.
Liquid water is an important part of the equation. On Earth, all forms of life require water to survive.
Among the planets in our solar system, only Earth has a more hospitable climate than Mars, and some scientists suspect Mars once sheltered primitive, bacteria-like organisms.
Previous missions found evidence the Red Planet at one time boasted ample quantities of water, and the question is whether liquid water is still present.
"As with many discoveries, the possibility that liquid water may be coming to the surface of Mars today poses many questions," the scientists said.
"Where is the water coming from? How is it being maintained in liquid form given the present and most likely past environments? How widespread is the water?"
They also wondered whether the water could be used as a resource for future missions to explore Mars.
The two sites are inside craters in the Terra Sirenum and the Centauri Montes regions of southern Mars.
"The shapes of these deposits are what you would expect to see if the material were carried by flowing water," Michael Malin, lead author of the paper, said.
"They have finger-like branches at the downhill end and easily diverted around small obstacles."
The researchers first reported the discovery of the gullies in 2000, but this is the first time they have revealed the presence of newly deposited material seemingly carried by liquid water.
Last month, NASA said the Mars Global Surveyor mission appeared to be at an end, saying it had lost contact after a decade-long mission in which it mapped the surface of Mars, tracked its climate and searched for evidence of water.

WA fishers welcome new illegal fishing laws
The fishing industry in Western Australia has welcomed new laws to toughen the nation's defences against illegal fishing.
The Royal Australian Navy has been given permission to shoot at uncooperative illegal fishing vessels to disable engines or rudders but not sink them.
Kimberley Professional Fishing Association spokesman Alan Fraser believes it will be a better deterrent.
"There's been a lot of talk of action being taken and money and resources being expended on trying to solve this problem, but really up until now our efforts have been pretty dismal," he said.

Core cattle breeding stock numbers fall
The New South Wales Opposition says core cattle breeding stock levels have fallen by 65 per cent due to the drought.
Opposition primary industries spokesman Duncan Gay claims it could take five years to rebuild stock levels.
North-west stock agent Dick Cameron says some producers have already lost all of their breeding stock and may never recover.
"Some people have run out of heart, some have run out of money and some have run out of both," he said.

US citrus export prices skyrocket
Citrus exports to the United States this year have attracted some of their highest prices in years.
Exports of navel oranges were down 33 per cent on the initial forecasts due to severe frost damage, with 1.4 million cartons shipped.
Greg Nelson from DNE World Fruit Sales says quality has been a factor in the good prices.
"We really applaud the efforts of the growers, the packers, the quality control inspectors in Australia because the condition of the fruit was excellent," he said.

Chiquita takeover stalls
A takeover bid for the major food processor and wholesaler Chiquita Brands South Pacific has been stalled.
Tradefresh, a joint venture between Timbercorp and the Cost Group, has managed to acquire control of the company with 78 per cent ownership.
But plans to de-list the company from the stock exchange cannot go ahead because investment company MMC Contrarian is not likely to sell its 12 per cent stake.
Tradefresh and Chiquita chairman Robert Costa says he is disappointed at MMC's stance.
"Our original intention was to secure 100 per cent of the company, that's still our intention," he said.
"Now we know that's not going to happen in the short term because we have a significant shareholder in MMC, who at this stage are not selling and that's their prerogative."
Chiquita has interests in the blueberry, banana, mushroom and citrus sectors.

US beef industry suspicious about bone chips find
The US Agriculture Department wants to examine bone chips that South Korea claims it found in two rejected shipments of American beef.
The US industry is suspicious about where the fragments came from.
US beef industry sources argue the tiny bones the Koreans claim they found, which caused them to reject the US shipments, may not have been from animals the same age as the beef.
United States Department of Agriculture Deputy Under-Secretary Chuck Lambert is not ignoring the possibility that the shipments may have been tampered with.
"We've asked to have the bone chips returned, some people have suggested DNA sampling or other means of trying to determine the origin of those bone chips," he said.
The latest suspicions threaten to raise the US-Korea beef dispute to a new level after Korea earlier this year agreed to reopen its market following a 2003 US mad cow case.

Study to investigate irrigation scheme
The Tasmanian Government is looking at building the state's biggest irrigation scheme.
A study will look at the possibility of diverting water used for hydro electricity to farmers in some of the driest parts of the state.
Farmer Richard Gardiner says power generation should no longer be the only use for the water.
"If you look at the state of water availability in the whole country and you look at the fact that there's 2,000 odd megalitres a day earning $10 a megalitres, I think there is no other way we can go into the future," he said.

Company defends GM canola imports
The importer of Australia's first shipment of genetically modified (GM) canola says it had no choice but to buy in grain because of falling domestic production.
Three Greenpeace protesters had been arrested at the Port of Newcastle yesterday as they tried to block 57,000 tonnes of Canadian canola being offloaded.
The grain will be processed in Newcastle and sold to unnamed buyers in the oilseed and biodiesel industries.
Cargill Australia importer Robert Green says crop levels in the eastern states have been dramatically reduced.
"The current industry estimates that the crop's only been an odd 160,000 tonnes in the eastern states, versus an east coast demand of over 500,000 tonnes of seed," he said.

Milk production expected to drop
The dairy industry is expecting a big drop in milk production next year as farmers struggle to meet high feed prices, particularly in non drought-declared areas.
Although milk processors are negotiating better farm gate prices and offering interest free loans, farmers are having major problems securing reliable feed deliveries.
Dairy consultant Bill Naughtin says some farmers are not milking as much.
"I have heard on the grapevine that some people have decided to go once a day in an effort to reduce water use, but most people I have spoken to have a plan in place to feed their animals," he said.
"The principal concern at the moment is where are they going to get the money to pay for the feed and how are they going to access feed that's reasonable quality and reliable."

Pressure
Dry conditions in Tasmania are putting pressure on farmers who have been agisting dairy cows for their Victorian colleagues.
Worsening seasonal conditions are making it harder for farmers to help, but farmer Greg Hall says they are doing their best.
"When we agreed to take an extra 100 or so heifers that was some six weeks ago because there was quite a bit of rough weather on Bass Strait it took some time to get them over," he said.

Drought to impact on farm incomes
The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) says farm incomes are predicted to fall this financial year because of the drought.
It says farm GDP is to drop by 16 per cent and agricultural exports are likely to fall 14 per cent.
The ABS figures are confirming what farmers are seeing in the paddock as their incomes are dropping, while the cost of their inputs are staying the same or rising if they are feeding expensive grain to animals.
Meanwhile peak farm groups in the eastern states have formed a Recovery Alliance to look at how the agriculture sector will rebuild after the drought.
The group will chase further funding from the Federal Government to help farmers buy seed, fertiliser and maintain core breeding stock.
New South Wales Farmers president Jock Laurie says the situation is dire for all rural communities, not just farmers.
"If we get into a situation where people out there actually reduce their cropping by half, then obviously that's the income halved for a lot of those small businesses," he said.
"In circumstances like these, what we're aiming to do is to try to make sure we get as much money flowing through agriculture, which then flows straight back in through those small communities - that will keep those small communities going, businesses going.
"The thing about this is that it's a way to help the whole regions, the whole communities, not just individual farmers."

Local community loses out
The economic impact of the drought is hitting home in one small community in southern New South Wales.
The Temora Shire Council says many local grain growers have not harvested a crop this year, costing the region about $100 million in lost income.
Mayor Peter Speirs says when farmers stop spending, the whole town suffers.
"It will be very hard for some of our businesses, there will probably be rationalisation of staff in some areas," he said.

Fires begin to merge as winds shift
Fire authorities in Victoria are warning that 600,000 hectares of Alpine country in the state's north and south-east could be on fire by the weekend.
Fires sparked by lightning strikes earlier this week are merging as winds shift.
Temperatures are set to climb into the high 30s on Saturday, along with predicted hot northerly winds.
Bairnsdale district cattle grazier Frank O'Connor says all farmers can do is renew fire breaks, check water supplies and pack personal belongings.
"We've gone through our family photographs and things that connect you to your ancestors and so forth, they've all been put in a bag," he said.

Opposition urges changes to croc laws
The Queensland Opposition is calling for legislative changes relating to capturing crocodiles and harvesting wild crocodile eggs.
Under the current system, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible for the capture of problem crocodiles.
But the Oppositions environment spokeswoman Rosemary Menkins says with an increasing number of crocs, more people need to help.
"Our suggestion is - which is being asked for by the farmers - is to allow registered crocodile farmers to actually capture and relocate the problem animals," she said.
"Secondly, a change in government policy that will allow the commercial harvest of wild crocodile eggs, of course under strict guidelines."

GM canola shipment contaminated: AQIS
The Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) has confirmed a 57,000 tonne shipment of imported genetically-modified (GM) canola is contaminated with Canadian barley and weeds.
The shipment arrived at the Port of Newcastle this week.
It will be processed in Newcastle into protein meal and vegetable oil, and sold to the food and biodiesel industries.
National manager for Plant Programs at AQIS Peter Liehne says it is common for bulk commodities to contain other material.
"In this case we found that there are some seeds present in the shipment which have sufficient concern for us to look at the management of the product to ensure there is no risk to the environment resulting from these weed seeds," he said.

ABS revises grain storage figures
The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) has been forced to re-release figures on the amount of grain in storage after the industry questioned the statistics.
Earlier this week, the ABS said bulk grain handling companies had more than 13 million tonnes of grain in stock, including 10 million tonnes of wheat.
The revised figures show a drop to 10 million tonnes in storage overall, with wheat making up around 7 million.
The bureau's Karen Connaughton says there were a number of reasons for the change.
"We haven't undertaken this collection since December 2004 so it was quite difficult for us to verify the benchmark figure," she said.
"We did make some efforts to verify the figure and we got some broad parameters from people, and it appears that the estimates we provided were too high."

AWB wheat export veto laws passed
The Federal Parliament has passed laws stripping AWB of its wheat export veto, handing it to Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran for six months.
Mr McGauran told Parliament the move would give certainty to wheat growers, particularly in Western Australia, providing a range of options for selling their wheat.

Gold price continues to climb
The gold price continues to climb on the back of a weaker US dollar and there are even predictions the price could reach $US700 by Christmas.
Gold is once again being touted as the currency of choice on international markets as the US dollar continues to weaken.
Compounding that effect is the global instability generated by Iran's desire to develop nuclear weapons and a move away from the greenback by that country as well as China.
China has announced it will start holding euros in preference to US dollars.
That has brought the bullish prediction out of Canada that gold could go above $US700 within weeks.

Drought lowers wool production estimates
The latest estimates for wool production this season have fallen further due to the drought.
According to Australian Wool Innovation, shorn wool production for 2006-07 is expected to fall 9 per cent to 421 million kilograms.
The fall is due to a national drop in fleece weights, which are forecast to hit their lowest level in more than 20 years.
Meanwhile wool prices continue to hold onto strong gains achieved in recent weeks, with a slight increase in the market at this week's sales.

French ask questions over cheese shipment rejection
The French Government is demanding an explanation from Australian quarantine authorities over the rejection of a fourth shipment of roquefort cheese, containing high levels of E coli bacteria.
The Departments of Agriculture and Foreign Affairs are in talks with French trade representatives to resolve the dispute over the non-pasteurised product.
The importer, Lactalis, has stopped sending the iconic blue cheese to Australia until the two countries reach agreement over its safety.
Lydia Buchtmann from Food Standards Australia New Zealand says authorities have to be careful of any imported raw milk product.
"It's a complex issue and I suppose it's a question of finding out where the contamination occurs," she said.
"Of course the last thing that the importer or the producer of the cheese wants is someone to get ill from it.

Aust wine exports up 8pc
The volume of Australian wine exports has reached a record 749 million litres this year, up 8 per cent.
In the latest wine export approval report, the value of wine has increased slightly by 0.2 per cent, which is the first positive result in months.
Lawrie Stanford from the Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation says demand ahead of Christmas from the UK, China and Europe has led to increased volumes.
"Traditionally the Australian wine industry ships a lot of wine overseas to meet the Christmas needs and also wine has matured over the last season around this time," he said.
"So normally our peak season is around at the moment but we've had a couple of quiet months and November is a a great catch up for us."

NT growers brand small mango trays a flop
New, smaller trays used to transport mangoes have been branded a failure by many growers in the Northern Territory.
The major supermarket chains Coles and Woolworths introduced the 12 per layer trays to reduce handling.
But they are estimated to have cost Territory packing houses more than $2 million, which is not being recouped in the marketplace.
Karl Gygar from Pinata Marketings says the supermarkets will have to accept the trays are not working.
"Customers are looking at these boxes and thinking that they're either rejects from Coles and Woolworths, and so obviously not worth a premium price," he said.
"I know for a fact that a lot of Queensland growers have cancelled their 12 per layer box orders just due to the reaction in the market."

Buffalo whisperer hopes for more support to send buffaloes to Aceh
Efforts have begun to send another shipment of trained buffaloes from the Northern Territory to the Indonesian province of Aceh.
Seven water buffalo were sent to remote rural villages earlier this year to help residents recover from the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami.
Buffalo whisperer Graham Heffernan says the villagers have been frustrated by delays in replacing their important beasts of burden.
He is hoping the Federal Government will support plans to send another 50 by April.
"One of the first things one of the farmers said to me was, 'why so long'?" Mr Heffernan said.
"He wasn't having a go at me ... taking so long to get the buffalos there, it was like, 'all this other aid has happened here in Aceh, why has it taken so long for someone to bring buffaloes to us, because that's what we really need'.
"And that's just the beginning you know. Like hopefully in 12-18 months we may be sending them in hundreds per month."
The first Australian aid donation of trained water buffalo was the result of an unlikely alliance between a buffalo whisperer, a private benefactor, Newcastle surfers, the live export industry, shipping, fodder, trucking and quarantine authorities.

Farmers urged to consider growing truffles
Farmers looking to diversify after the drought are being urged to look at producing truffles.
It takes at least five years to produce up to 40 kilograms of truffles a hectare.
The exotic french fungus is currently fetching $3,000 a kilogram.
The Australian Truffle Growers Association is having its inaugural meeting this weekend near Canberra, although grower Wayne Haslam says potential newcomers need to know the facts.
"You've got to be careful though - if it sounds too good to be true it usually is," he said.

Stock route traveller praises farmers' generosity
The generosity of farmers in times of drought has astounded a woman who has been travelling the stock routes of southern New South Wales.
For the past two months, Elizabeth Murphy from the Adelaide Hills has been travelling along the Murrumbidgee River in a replica drovers wagon with two horses and a couple of chooks for company.
She says the country has dried off and water is short but farmers are always keen to help.
"The drought's so bad the farmers have got no food and yet when I was parked at Darlington Point I was swimming in the river with my grandchildren and I got out, and somebody had left a bag of horse feed for me," she said.
"I didn't even know who they were, they didn't even say hello, they just dropped it off there for me.

Drought won't stop delivery of PM's Xmas tree
Not even the festive season can escape the drought, with this year's harvest of Christmas trees producing smaller trees than usual due to poor rainfall.
Christmas tree farmer Gary Black from Gippsland in Victoria says trees from the southern states are in high demand.
He says one of his special customers will receive the best tree he has to offer.

Senate committee members reject petrol inquiry report
Members of a Senate committee investigating petrol prices have rejected the inquiry's final report, prepared by Liberal Senator George Brandis.
The report concludes market fluctuations save motorists money, further regulation would cost them more and the Federal Government cannot influence the higher prices paid in rural areas.
Deputy chairwoman of the Senate Economics Committee Labor Senator Ursula Stephens says the report's conclusions are unacceptable.
"There was great disappointment by the recommendations which really supported the status quo and found there was nothing that could be done that could alleviate higher petrol prices for country people," she said.

Wheat export system should focus on grower returns, Crean says
The Opposition's new trade spokesman, Simon Crean, says the single desk wheat export system should not be used as a bargaining chip in world trade talks.
Prime Minister John Howard has said the Government will be careful it does not throw away the single desk without getting something in return in the international arena.
But Mr Crean says if Labor won government it would place more importance on maximising returns to wheat growers and making sure the system was properly scrutinised.
"This can't be seen as a bargaining chip, it has to be seen as ensuring the return to viability and integrity in our wheat trade," he said.
Meanwhile Wheat Australia, the consortium of grain handlers ABB, CBH and Graincorp, has re-submitted its export application for 500,000 tonnes of wheat to Iraq.
It follows the decision last week by the Federal Government to shift the veto power over wheat exports from AWB to Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran.
East coast grain handler Graincorp has also made four applications to export wheat to Japan, Europe, Indonesia and Malaysia, totalling more than 200,000 tonnes.
In another development, grain analysts are predicting global stocks to fall to the lowest level in 20 years next season, as drought conditions hit most wheat-producing countries.
The United States Department of Agriculture predicts global wheat stocks will drop to 119 million tonnes next year, the lowest levels seen in two decades, thanks to drought and difficult planting conditions around the world.
As a result, this year's high prices are likely to continue into 2007, with the competition between fuel industries and food adding to the pressure.
Grains analyst Lloyd George says the so-called food versus fuel factor is significant.
"The biggest surprise factor that's happened on a long term basis, the emergence of biofuels would be right up there," he said.
"There's strong incentives to use these biofuels in a number of different countries and I'd expect that to continue."

Saleyards used to protect shelter stock
As bushfires continue to burn in Victoria, local saleyards are being used to shelter livestock.
Wangaratta saleyards in the north-east will be open 24 hours a day to accept cattle and sheep in emergencies.
Water and shelter will be available but the chief executive of Wangaratta Council, Doug Sharp, says feed also needs to be provided.
"We can hold them indefinitely but it's the situation regarding feed that is the issue," he said.

Senate committee calls for national water register
A Senate committee is calling on the federal and state governments to better deal with Australia's water problems by establishing a national water entitlements register.
The Rural and Regional Affairs Committee's water inquiry report also recommends the Federal Government should build a sewage recycling plant to educate the public and help farmers switch from crops that use large amounts of water.
Committee chairman Senator Bill Heffernan says better accounting of current water stocks is needed to help planning.
"We need to put onto a database what water we've got," he said.
"In the Murray Darling Basin, we've identified 3,000 gigalitres that's going to disappear out of the system due to climate change, fires, forest interception.

Eyre Peninsula farmers may have to shoot sheep
Farmers on Eyre Peninsula in South Australia may have to shoot their sheep in the next few months because they cannot afford to feed them or send them to market.
Local producer Andrew Mills says low prices being paid for sheep and lambs, combined with the high cost of transport to saleyards north of Adelaide, is forcing tough decisions.
He says the glut of sheep and lambs from interstate makes it difficult to even book sheep and lambs into abattoirs.
"In the next few months you might see quite a few sheep from Eyre Peninsula that will just have to be slaughtered and buried if the numbers keep coming out of Victoria," he said.
"It's got to the stage this week that unless they are very good sheep, you'll get a bill if you send them to Adelaide.

Wine grape growers may run out of water
Some wine grape growers in South Australia's Riverland could run out of irrigation water as early as next month.
The state's Murray River irrigators are currently only able to use 60 per cent of their entitlement.
Viticulturist Peter Burne says with the ongoing dry, irrigators are using more water than usual.
"A lot of growers have already gone over 30 per cent of their total allocation for the year," he said.

Dept hopes sediment flow into Lake Argyle will decrease
Authorities hope they have slowed down the amount of soil running into Australia's largest inland sea, Lake Argyle, in the Kimberley region of Western Australia.
A decade ago, scientists estimated the Ord River Irrigation Scheme's main reservoir would lose 30 per cent of its storage capacity in the next 100 years.
But sediment levels have recently been surveyed again and Duncan Palmer from the Department of Water hopes they show a slow-down of nutrient build up from wet season run-off.

PGA to fight for farmers' water rights
The Western Australian Pastoralist and Graziers Association (PGA) says it will fight to maintain farmers' water rights after an Environmental Protection Authority report allowed 45 gigalitres of water to be transported to Perth from the southern Yarragadee aquifer.
The report, released late last week, says the Water Corporation can sustainably draw water from the aquifer without harming the environment.
But farmers are concerned their future water needs have been overlooked.
Water spokesman for the PGA, Dave Wren, says it is time Perth started developing its own water saving strategies.
"The National Water Initiative calls for each catchment to have a plan - Perth has not got a plan," he said.
"There's at least 112 gigalitres of water being pumped from domestic bores unlicensed and unmetered, there's recycling opportunities in Perth that have been identified.

NSW farm wins imported mushrooms anti-dumping case
A three-year anti-dumping case on imported mushrooms has now been resolved in favour of an Australian processor.
The Federal Government has upheld its decision to put anti-dumping measures in place against Chinese tinned mushrooms.
Michael Leahy, from Windsor Farms in central New South Wales, says his company is now considering action on dumped tomatoes, potatoes and corn but has urged the Federal Government to speed up the complaints process.
"What it needs is clarification and some administrative changes inside the Act under which they operate," he said.
"But also it probably needs to be resourced sufficiently to conduct the investigations quickly enough.

Committee pushes for act of Parliament to handle private logging
A New South Wales committee trying to resolve a 20-year debate over the management of privately owned native forests wants a separate act of Parliament developed to deal with the issue.
There are 8.5 million hectares of private timber resources in the state and green groups want tighter controls on logging.
The Primary Industries and Economic Development Committee, which is advising the State Government, has until the end of the year to resolve the long-running debate or risk industry losing control of the forests to the State Government.
Committee chair Craig Tate says the issue is not simply about regulating timber harvesting.
"We have small communities out there that depend on the timber industry and the private resource is a multi-million dollar industry and we have to be very careful how we deal with it," he said.
"But also we are in a major environmental situation at the moment.

Bath sponge has potential global demand, scientist says
Marine researchers have discovered properties of the golden bath sponge that will benefit agriculture, pearling and medicine.
Dr Chris Battershill, of the Australian Institute of Marine Science, says more work is needed to successfully farm sponges.
"In the agricultural sector the leads can be taken right through to market and quite quickly," he said.
"Australia is leading the globe in many of the areas of farm husbandry and maintenance, if you like, but also in the bio-medicinal sector, there is now a capability to take things into the clinic.

Govt not dealing quickly enough with global warming concerns: Garrett
The Opposition's new environment spokesman says a federal Labor Government would be more responsive to farmers' concerns about climate change.
Peter Garrett, a former head of the Australian Conservation Foundation, was appointed in Kevin Rudd's weekend frontbench reshuffle.
Others with new portfolios relevant to rural Australia include Kerry O'Brien in primary industries, Simon Crean in trade and regional development, Anthony Albanese in water, and Chris Evans in resources.
Mr Garrett says the Federal Government is not dealing quickly enough with community concerns about global warming.

Global commodities demand to prop up farm sector
Despite drought conditions and plunging farm incomes, high global demand for commodities is expected to keep Australia's farm sector afloat in 2007, with prices up 16 per cent on the same time last year.
The Westpac Rural Commodity Index also shows rising rural land values are providing a buffer against debt and will be the main driver in post-drought recovery.
Westpac's Justin Smirk says most farmers will be able to withstand a drop in income next year.
"Over the last five years Australia's top farmers have actually been generating rates of return that match if not exceed a lot of rates of return we see in other assets around Australia," he said.

NFF hits out at make up of carbon emissions task force
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) is angry at the make-up of Prime Minister John Howard's new task force to investigate carbon emissions trading.
President David Crombie says stacking the group with mining and energy interests has hurt any real attempts to address climate change.
Senior staff from BHP Billiton, Qantas, Xstrata Alumina and the National Bank will join Federal Government bureaucrats on the task force.
Mr Crombie says it is extremely short-sighted of Mr Howard to exclude agriculture and other sector interests.
"Farmers do have it within their capacity to contribute to reducing emissions, which are one of the major causes of greenhouse gas change and are linked with climate change," Mr Crombie said.
"If farmers have a role to play there, which I believe they do, then it's important that they be part of any long term plan going forward."
Meanwhile a national emissions trading summit in Sydney has been told agriculture is paying the price for a century of pollution generated by the coal and resources sectors.
Australian Greens Senator Christine Milne says the Federal Government must set a national cap on emissions and coal companies should be forced to comply.
Senator Milne says the resources sector has made massive profits and agriculture has suffered as a consequence.
"We now have rural Australia suffering with extreme bushfires, with the collapse of their whole agricultural productive system because of climate change," she said.
"They are not being compensated for that by the coal industry so it's time that the resource-based industries recognised that they have got a role to play.

Growers warned not to sign contracts
There are claims today agents and merchants in the fruit and vegetable markets are trying to get around the looming mandatory code of conduct.
Growers say they are being offered contracts before the new code is introduced into Federal Parliament.
The code aims to make the sales process more transparent, so growers can see what happens with their products.
Peter Darley from the New South Wales Farmers Association says growers should not sign anything just yet.
"I have had phone calls from producers as of yesterday saying that there are ... contracts being presented by agents for them to look at and consider the obligations of signing contracts," he said.
"I would suggest to growers at this stage the code has not been enacted on yet in Parliament.
"If they are going to sign, that they certainly get an independent opinion before they go ahead and sign those contracts in consideration of their business."
The wholesale sector admits it is trying to circumvent the code before it is made law.

Tas bushfire damage 'severe'
Houses, pasture and fencing have been destroyed in a 10,000 hectare fire on Tasmania's north-east coast.
An assessment of damage is expected later today but at least 18 houses have been destroyed in the town of Scamander.
Local vet Tim McManus says the extent of stock losses is not yet known but at least one farm has suffered extensively.
"Glencoe around us had very severe fire damage, many of their paddocks are burnt and even now some of the bushland around them is still burning," he said.

Volunteer firefighters battle Vic blazes
Volunteer firefighters in Victoria are continuing to pour into the mountains to relieve weary colleagues.
Milder conditions are helping firefighting efforts, although temperatures are due to climb again later this week.
Myrrhee in the north-eastern King Valley is not under direct threat, so members of its fire brigade have joined the frontline effort.
Captain Bill Forge says the volunteers are doing all they can.
"Our crew have been working from fires at Whitfield for the last week, they're not at Myrrhee at all most of them," he said.

Labor pushes for wheat export system inquiry
Federal Labor's new primary industries spokesman wants an independent inquiry into whether the single desk wheat export system delivers the best value to growers.
Tasmanian Senator Kerry O'Brien says while the system delivers the best value to growers and the community, Labor will support it.
But he says the Federal Government should be appointing an independent group that would investigate wheat export marketing and report publicly to Parliament.
"To have the community debate that report, rather than this closed door approach to consultation that the Government has," he said.

US committee chief to let Senate decide on AWB probe
The new chairman of the US House Agriculture Committee says he will leave it up to the US Senate to probe the AWB scandal, but will look at ways to prevent problems in the future.
Collin Petersen says he is not interested in "assigning blame" based on "past history", but in dealing with the monopoly practices of the AWB and the Canadian Wheat Board for the future: "We're not happy about the Australian Wheat Board, we think that having this kind of a system is not fair and not right, and we've been trying to get rid of it for a long time, some of us," he said.
"So we will be watching to see how this is reconstituted and whether it is going to be done in a way that is transparent, or whether it's going to be utilised to undercut us when we're trying to go into other markets."
Mr Petersen expects the Senate, under new democratic leadership, to look at why the just-ended Republican Congress dropped any plans to probe the oil for food scandal.
Meanwhile wheat exporter AWB has dropped prices for the 2006/07 national pool by $8 a tonne.
The company blames a weaker international market for the decline, with the benchmark premium white wheat now returning $242 a tonne.

Rice crop expected to drop
This year's rice crop will be one of the smallest in more than 50 years due to cuts to water allocations in southern New South Wales.
The Department of Primary Industries estimates less than 12,000 hectares of rice has been sown, only 10 per cent of average plantings.
Other industry sources say the figure is more like 15,000 hectares, which will yield around 130,000 tonnes of rice.
Griffith district rice grower Glen Andreazza says the late reduction in water allocation means he has had to abandon his rice crop.
"I had sown 80 acres of rice and had to de-water all of it," he said.
"It was to the point where all I had to do was to keep water on it and watch it grow.

Bass Coast applies for EC assistance
One of the greenest parts of southern Australia is now putting its hand up for exceptional circumstances (EC) drought assistance.
Farmers on the Bass Coast in southern Victoria say they are suffering one of the worst seasons on record.
Stephanie Symes from the Bass Coast Shire Council says district farmers are used to much wetter conditions.
"It's the first time we've ever had stage four water restrictions applied," she said.

Extra funds allocated for Qld sugar industry reform
The Federal Government has announced another $33 million to reform the sugar industry in Queensland.
One of the plans is to generate a third of Mackay's energy needs from nearby cane fields.
Under a $95 million project, the Mackay Sugar Co-operative will transform one its mills to convert sugar cane waste into steam and then electricity.
Chief executive John Pollock says the funding will kickstart the plant.
"We're really pleased that $12 million that the Government have seen the value of the project and we presume that it's funding the early stages of that project rather then the latter stages," he said.

Camels sold as weed eaters in Qld
Prices have fallen at Australia's third commercial camel sale but organisers say there is a growing market for using the animals as weed eaters.
Camel breeder Paddy McHugh has sold 67 camels under the hammer at the Gracemere saleyards in central Queensland.
He says while a few camels were bought to boost breeding numbers, most will have new jobs managing weeds.
"That's probably the most predominant use of them at the moment, is to eat the parkinsonia and prickly acacia and all the wattle regrowth," he said.
"They do a great job and they coexist with cattle - they've got all sorts of funny little things, the ruminant bug they pass on.

Drought forcing vegetable prices up
Shoppers are being warned that vegetable prices could rise by 30 per cent before Christmas, and even double in January, as the drought continues to hurt production.
But grower groups are worried that price hikes at the retail level are not being passed back to farmers, with many locked into contracts that do not recognise higher costs.
AusVeg chairman Mike Badcock says some growers have raised concerns about profiteering during the drought.
"I think while we can keep spreading the word that we'll be looking very hard at margins and the returns to growers, hopefully that keeps everybody honest. There's an opportunity here to reward growers who have done the right thing, drought proofed their farm and they do need some reward for that," he said.
The Australian Consumer and Competition Commission is reviewing prices in the meat industry as well, with a report due next week.
And it is not just the drought that is set to hurt prices.
Fruit and vegetable growers in southern Queensland are counting the cost of devastating hail storms which swept through the region late yesterday.
While up to 90 millimetres of rain was recorded in gauges on the Darling Downs, the hail has left a multi-million dollar damage bill.
Growers have reported damage to crops of cabbages, strawberries, plums, table grapes, tomatoes, mangoes and avocadoes and Stanthorpe lettuce grower Dean Radin says that could mean a price rise at the supermarket.

Wholesalers not happy with fruit and veg code
The controversial regulatory code of conduct for the fruit and vegetable industry is expected to be signed off by the Governor-General today.
But sections of the industry still are not happy with it.
The code specifies how wholesalers and growers must deal with each other in the future, but excludes supermarkets, the big retailers and processors.
Wholesaler Andrew Young, from the Central Markets Association of Australia, says the code he has seen will be a cost burden for everyone.
"It adds significant administration costs. There's legal requirements that have been introduced, which growers must obtain legal advice prior to executing an agreement with a wholesaler. There's much more prescription in terms of how wholesalers can and cannot act and virtually requiring in excess 90 per cent of the industry to totally change how they've done business for many many years," he said.

Zinifex and Umicore link for zinc
Australia's largest lead and zinc miner will combine its smelting assets with a Belgian company to become the world's biggest producer of zinc alloy.
Zinifex has signed a memorandum of understanding with Umicore to form a global company to produce 1.2 million tonnes of zinc and alloys a year.
Zinifex says it wants to concentrate on mining, but spokesman Martin MacFarlane says existing smelter operations in Hobart and Port Pirie will not be affected.
"Those businesses tomorrow will continue on much as they have today, there's no change to any of the employees terms and conditions for the short to medium term future - we see the business will be very much as it is today," he said.
"Longer term, however, it may create and open opportunities that may not have been otherwise available just from the fact that Zinifex did not wish to develop that side of the business."

Japan agrees to export talks
Despite concern over the impact on its agriculture sector, Japan has agreed to discuss better access for Australian farm exports under a possible free trade agreement.
Formal talks on the trade deal will start early next year, which the Federal Government believes could be worth $39 billion to Australia over 20 years.
Trade Minister Warren Truss says Japan might push for more opportunities to sell niche products to Australia, but farmers here should receive the biggest gains.
