A strategic plan has been released for the sector, raising a number of areas to be addressed, like improved marketing and better relationships with food processors.
Consultant Euan Laird, who helped produce the report, says the changes will see some growers leave the industry.
"Only the strong will survive," he said.
"It's a really tough market out there and those that change and adapt, and modify, and meet the demands of consumers will survive so I'll put an estimate that only 50 to 60 per cent of existing growers will survive in the long term and they are going to be those that are adaptable."
Tasmania's growers agree with the plan but most feel the hard work is still ahead.
"We've got to start somewhere to get the vegetable industry off the ground or to stop it going back into the ground I suppose," one grower said.

NSW Govt urged to allow graziers access to forests, national parks
The New South Wales Farmers Association wants graziers to be given access to state forests and national parks to help feed hungry livestock.
The association says feed is become scarce as the drought intensifies.
President Jock Laurie is urging the NSW Government to consider the proposal, which he says would help farmers hold onto core breeding stock.
"As far as we're concerned it would be a good tool for the feeding of core breeding stock throughout this drought period, especially when feed reserves are so low," he said.
"You don't need a long bureaucratic process to go through here, so get in and make a decision so that people can then plan well into the next few months about how they're going to feed stock."

Starlings attack cherry orchards
Cherry orchards in central New South Wales are suffering major bird damage this year.
Large numbers of starlings are attacking crops much earlier than normal, which growers believe is due to the drought and a lack of food.
Cherry grower Guy Gaeta says he has never seen so much damage.
"They are getting to the cherries when they are still green," he said.
"Whether it is because they are hungry because of the drought.
"I have never seem them before and everybody in the district is having the same problems. They are not eating the cherries, they are just chopping them off.
"They go to taste them and then they are sour. They pull it off the tree and then they go to another one hoping it is a bit sweeter.

Company offers incentives to encourage truckies to stay
A major trucking company is planning to pay incentives to its drivers to encourage them to stay in the industry.
Road Trains of Australia says it is hard to find staff with many drivers being lured into the mining sector.
While a national campaign is under way to attract more young people towards a career in transport, Mike Bailey from Road Trains' Mount Isa branch, says the company needs to make an effort to ease the skills shortage.
"We're trying to start a scheme where - just within ourselves - that they get rewarded if they stay in the industry, in our employment, for a number of years," he said.
"At the end of that time they'll get a bonus or whatever for hanging in there, it'll be like a miniature long service leave sort of thing."

Increased pay helps retain mango pickers
Improved wages have helped to secure pickers for the Northern Territory's mango season.
The NT Mango Association has set a recommended minimum wage of $16.50 this year, more than a dollar above the national award.
President Peter Marks says there are not many pickers around but the incentive has helped to keep workers on for the whole season.
"We had the unions involved, we had Aboriginal organisations involved and all the labour providers," he said.
"We asked their opinion how we should manage this situation because we could see it was not going to be good.

Drought set to bring live export trade growth
The Australian live export trade is tipped to grow because of the drought.
Lower prices for sheep and cattle have prompted international markets to step up demand for livestock which fell away after the Cormo Express incident in 2003 and more expensive livestock costs.
Meat and Livestock Australia spokesman Mike Hayward says despite low prices the trade does give producers another alternative during the dry times.
"It was really noticeable in the west when they really got hit with the drought early in the year," he said.
"A lot of livestock would have probably died on properties if they hadn't had the live trade.

Wool bale fetches seasonal record price
A super ultra-fine bale of has fetched a seasonal record of 70,000 cents a kilogram in Victoria.
The 12.4 micron bale is the finest yet produced by Brockville growers Andrew and Annie Gardner, who have a farm at Penshurst, in the western district.
The same buyer also paid 67,000 cents a kilogram for a 12.5 micron bale from Pyrenees Park in central Victoria.

EC farmer assistance requires rethink, expert says
An environmental and climatic change risk analyst says the Federal Government needs to rethink its exceptional circumstances (EC) assistance to farmers.
The University of Canberra's Dr Brian Button says he is opposed to EC funding because floods and droughts are a natural occurrence and not exceptional.
He says the Government should look at other ways of helping.
"Now in Canada the Federal Government sponsors to the tune of about $2 billion Canadian a year a crop insurance scheme," he said.

New tree plantings fail to secure farm biodiversity: research
New research says offsetting the clearing of native vegetation with new tree plantings is not an effective way to maintain biodiversity on farms.
The Australian National University research suggests it takes up to 300 years for newly-planted vegetation to provide the same food and shelter to animals and birds.
Ecology Professor David Lindenmayer says the findings show a need to preserve remnant vegetation.
"We've found this from our data on the south-west slopes of New South Wales and it's for reptiles, it's for possums and gilders, arboreal marsupials and also for birds," he said.

Scientists claim new water filter halves purification costs
Scientists in Italy say they have developed new ways of filtering water that should halve the cost of purification.
The water membrane technology is already being used in other countries to recycle waste, make bore water palatable and desalinate salty water.
Professor Enrico Drioli from the University of Calabria says the membranes, which look like plastic wrap, mirror the natural filtering membranes in our bodies.
"Just a film that the one you can use for packaging your sandwich sometimes, so this film is able to be selective," he said.

AWB's profit drops
Wheat exporter AWB has announced a 68 per cent cent fall in annual net profit to $58.1million.
The company says it will pay a reduced final dividend of 4 cents, with the drought cutting the harvest and less domestic grain trading.
The oil-for-food inquiry has cost the company almost $24 million, while redundancies and restructuring has taken $10 million off the bottom line.
Managing director Gordon Davis says AWB will remain viable if it loses control of the single desk for wheat exports in the wake of the Cole inquiry.
"AWB has been pursuing a strategy of diversifying its income away from pool management. We've got strong and growing business in our international trading in Geneva, Brazil and India," Mr Davis said.

Grain growers won't oppose removal of AWB's wheat veto
The Grains Council says it would not oppose any move by the Federal Government to remove AWB's veto on wheat export applications.
There is a push from within the Government to take away the veto to allow other grain companies to export wheat.
But chairman of the peak body, Murray Jones, says growers must be consulted before any major structural changes are made to the single desk.
"We don't know what the Government's reaction will be and I'm leaving it open to them to make their reaction," Mr Jones said.
"We've consulted regularly and continuously during the course of the last few months and we'll continue to do so, and continue to put forward the growers' position, which is they wish to retain a single desk and they want to be consulted if there are to be any changes."
The Grains Council says it wants growers to have control of the export system.
But the Australian Grain Exporters Association is pushing the Federal Government to remove the single desk.
The association of bulk grain handlers wants an interim licensing system put in place to smooth the way for deregulation.

Beazley tours NSW drought affected areas
Federal Labor leader Kim Beazley has begun a tour of central New South Wales to hear first hand how the drought is hurting rural families.
Mr Beazley has used the trip to make his first announcement on drought policy,
He visited three properties near Forbes in the central west of New South Wales and will be shown the Jemmalong Irrigation Scheme, which this year has a zero water allocation.
Young farmers highlighted the difficulties they are encountering in remaining viable and told Mr Beazley about their failed crops, many of which were to be irrigated.
The Labor leader told the producers if his party were elected, it would set up a series of research institutes to help commercialise technology to better manage the drought.

Live export trade inhumane, says RSPCA
The RSCPA says it has proof that a majority of Australians believe the live export trade is inhumane.
An national phone survey of 600 people by Roy Morgan Research has found almost 60 per cent believe the trade is cruel.

MLA holds Adelaide AGM
The livestock industry's peak national body, Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA), is holding its annual general meeting in Adelaide today.
Around 250 producers and industry representatives have finished the producers forum which covered the current and future direction of the red meat industry.
Many apologies were received from farmers, both local and interstate, who have been affected by bushfires and could not attend.
Four resolutions will be voted on at the AGM regarding the election of MLA directors, followed by a question period where the recent NLIS poll scandal and the process of registering voters from levy paying producers is expected to be raised.
At the same time, more than 150 cattle producers have rallied on the Western Downs in Queensland, in a direct boycott of the MLA meeting.
The Australian Beef Association (ABA) says it is protesting against laws and regulations that destroy the viability of producers.
The rally has seen producers travel from as far as Western Australia to attend the Queensland rally and chairwoman Linda Hewitt says she is going to call on the Australian Government to undertake a full review of Meat and Livestock Australia.
The rally has already seen a group of graziers hear from experts on depression and a psychiatrist who is highlighting the need for help at the farm gate.
Speaker Danny Beer from the US cattle producing organisation R-Calf has spoken about its support for country of origin labelling in the United States.

Uncontracted winegrape growers may be in demand
Uncontracted winegrape growers might have more luck selling their fruit this year.
A lack of water and frost damage in some parts of Australia means that remaining grapes are likely to be in demand.
Mike Stone from Murray Valley Winegrowers in Victoria says preliminary figures show the coming harvest could be several hundred thousand tonnes down on last season.
"Already we have heard of some offers for cabernet sauvignon and merlot of around $400 a tonne, so there is evidence of more interest," he said.

Biofuels industry facing grain cost challenge
A new report says the biggest challenge for the fledgling biofuels industry is to keep down the cost of grain for alternative energy production.
The independent report predicts Australia will almost double its production target of 350 million litres of biofuel by 2010.
But report author Graeme Bethune says cost is the biggest problem and eventually grain which is currently exported may be in demand by manufacturers.

Nuclear power report won't help uranium industry in short term
Australia's uranium sector says yesterday's positive review into nuclear power will make little difference to the industry in the short term.
Although share prices in uranium explorers rose on the back of the Switkowski report, the Association of Mining and Exploration says Australia's uranium reserves are still under-utilised.
Spokesman Ian Loftus says the public tends to confuse nuclear energy with uranium mining.
"We have some of the world's great resources in terms of uranium in the ground and we have the ability here and now, subject to government approvals of course, to dig up that uranium and use it to provide fuel for clean electricity for other parts of the world," Mr Loftus said.

McGauran supports environmental stewardship concept
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran has told a national conference on land management that the Government supports the idea of paying farmers for environmental work.
Mr McGauran has backed the environmental stewardship concept at the first national gathering of Australia's 56 natural resource management groups on the Gold Coast.
Andrew Drysdale from the Queensland Regional Groups Collective says the payment scheme is welcome but might not come into effect until 2008.
"The noise that [is] coming out of Canberra, it's not only about funding but how the funding is going to occur," he said.
"They're starting to talk about stewardship payments now which breaches that problem of being tied to election cycles.

Rising humidity, heat aids croc growth
The rapidly rising humidity and heat in the Northern Territory is proving good news for crocodile farms.
Many are busy grading baby saltwater crocodiles, according to size.
At Noonamah on the outskirts of Darwin, Mick Burns is sorting 12,000 baby reptiles, which are more than one-metre long.
"The animals get very dominant and territorial and they'll blue with any smaller animal," he said.
"No losses of fingers but certainly there would be a few little nips.
"This year has been pretty slow because we have had such a cold dry season, it's the third or fourth largest number of days that have been below a certain temperature so that certainly slows down the animals.

Student conference aims to share environment knowledge
With debate about the future of drought-stressed rivers in the headlines, Canberra students have launched plans for an International Conference on River Health.
The conference, set for October next year, will bring more than 600 students from across Australia and around the world to Canberra to share knowledge about their environment.
Founder and convener Arron Wood says it is important to let our future leaders explore river issues now, so they have a head start.
"To have kids from small towns like Mildura and Renmark, and those sorts of things, talking to someone in the Amazon about the issues that they're facing," he said.

Cities urged to consider buying water from irrigators
A report commissioned by the Federal Government says cities will need to consider buying water from irrigators to address major urban shortages.
Report author John Marsden says buying water from irrigators is a possibility for Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth and Canberra.
He says communities must consider the option.
"In general there's been a reluctance by governments to put this issue firmly on the table because of fear of upsetting rural electorates," he said.
"But of course, the rural waterholders trade water all the time, between themselves and there's no reason why the trade can't be with other parties, including with the cities."
Meanwhile the National Water Commission has confirmed it is conducting a feasibility study into piping water from so-called "water rich" areas of northern New South Wales, to drought-affected south-east Queensland.
The study, which will go to the Federal Government, is looking at rivers including the Wilson, Brunswick, Richmond, Tweed and Clarence.
Although the region has high rainfall, Wayne Franklin from Rous Water says there is not enough water to pipe across the border.
"When you look at the Clarence and the Clarence is the one below us so we're centred on the Richmond Valley," he said.
"If you look at either of our valleys and the amount of water we have we're really small fry compared to Queensland.

ABARE chief to take on climate change role
The nation's new chief commodity forecaster says predicting the effect of climate change on agriculture will have to become part of his work.
Phillip Glyde has been appointed executive director of the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) after working in the Departments of Prime Minister, Industry and Agriculture.
He says the agency needs to be responsive to industry and farmer needs but says providing economic analysis on climate change will be difficult.
"I think it is something that we will be doing more on, I hesitate to say when," he said.
"Really the issue there is the quality of the science and really the economic analysis flows from the science.
"One of the problems we've got at the moment is that impacts of climate change at a regional level or on a particular industry aren't really that well known."
Meanwhile grain farmers are being urged to factor in climate change when planning for the future.
Dr Peter Hayman from the South Australian Research and Development Institute has won a 'Seed of Light' award from the Grains Research and Development Corporation for his efforts to make farmers aware of climate change.
He says many grain growers are now wondering how to adapt.
"Certainly, no longer are people saying - what is climate change, is this something my grandchildren have to worry about?" he said.
"They're concerned about it and wanting to know more information about it now and what it means for their decision-making and planning.

Water use for timber plantations to be managed
Tasmania is moving to manage water use by the timber plantation sector as part of a review of its Water Management Act.
The review is recommending a study of water rights security and tenure, changes to the dams approval process and a risk management strategy for water use by large scale land use changes.
Alan Harradine from the Department of Primary Industries and Water says catchment models need to be refined.
"Under the National Water Initiative we basically are required to put in place those options," he said.

Cattle producers urged to audit livestock records
The Australian Beef Association (ABA) wants cattle producers to audit their livestock records listed on the database of the National Livestock Identification System (NLIS).
The system, which is designed to track every animal through electronic ear tags in case of a disease outbreak, has been heavily criticised by the breakaway group.
New president Brad Bellinger from New South Wales says the ABA's own research shows only 30 per cent of NLIS producer records are accurate.
"Now their own audit is the matter of matching what their actual property sales are to what is actually registered on the NLIS database account," Mr Bellinger said.
"We want to point out to the regulators and the Minister how bad the situation, how inaccurate the NLIS system is."
The Federal Government has commissioned an official audit of the database.
Meanwhile the peak national body, Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA), is calling for unity within the cattle industry.
The ABA boycotted MLA's annual general meeting in Adelaide yesterday and staged a rally in Queensland.
MLA chairman Don Heatley says cattle producers need to resolve NLIS issues by working together.
"Yes, there is criticism, and I don't resile from the criticism," he said.
"At the end of the day we've developed a new system and NLIS is new and it's not perfect at this stage but we will continue to work on it.

Pig tracing may go high-tech
The pig industry is considering launching an electronic system to trace animals.
The industry has already set up a traceability system called Pig Pass, where producers who export pigs fill out national vendor declaration forms.
But Bill Salter from producer group Australian Pork Limited (APL) says they are now looking at a paperless system with swipe cards instead of individual animal tags.
"The system would work on the basis of having everyone involved in Pig Pass actually being registered on the APL database," Mr Salter said.

Biodiesel plant opens
A $48 million biodiesel plant has been officially opened in Darwin today.
It is initially expected to annually produce 150 million litres of biodiesel using imported palm oil.
Natural Fuels managing director Dick Selwood says work is under way to develop a Territory soya bean industry to supplement the feedstock.

Native flower exports wilt
Australia's native flower sector expects to lose about 30 per cent of its export flower crop this year.
Drought, frosts and hot weather have decimated crops, with some growers reporting bud losses of 50 per cent and hundreds of thousands of flowers which are unsaleable.
Tony Kosky from the Australian Flower Export Council says lower production levels will affect Australia's international reputation as a reliable flower supplier.

Beazley commits to examining replanting scheme
The federal Opposition Leader has committed his party to examining a replanting scheme for farmers in drought affected areas.
Kim Beazley has been in central western New South Wales to look at the impact of the drought.
He says it is obvious people are hurting and assisting farmers to plant crops when conditions improve is one way of helping.
"In the short term I'll need to take back and talk through with my colleagues the things that need to happen with regard to the various drought programs, state and federal," he said.

Cane toads help reduce mosquito numbers
If you dread summer because of the mosquitoes, you might need to start hanging around cane toads.
As part of a study into the effect toads are having on native fauna, a team of scientists has found cane toad tadpoles are reducing mosquito numbers.
Professor of ecological biology at the University of Sydney Rick Shine says the toads could be contributing to better human health.
"We've simply set out bowls of water with and without cane toad tadpoles, we've put mosquito larvae in there and we've seen whether or not the mosquito larvae do survive and what size mozzie actually flies out at the end," Prof Shine said.

Prospect for rain improves
The National Climate Centre says a duel between sea temperatures in the Pacific and Indian oceans could bring slightly higher rainfall to much of Australia.
Indian Ocean temperatures are rising off Western Australia and up to Indonesia, cancelling out a worsening El Nino effect in the Pacific Ocean.
There is now a 50 per cent chance of average rainfall across most of Australia in the next three months, although north Queensland could be drier.
Senior climatologist Lyn Bettio says the prospect of rain certainly has not got any worse.
"It's actually looking better than what it was last month," she said.

Merino prices plummet
Prices for top merino sheep have plummeted at the annual Yass circuit sale, in New South Wales, once a stronghold for fine and superfine wool.
With a larger offering than last year, merino sheep and cross bred lambs are being offloaded as the drought bites deeper, with ewes being passed in for $1.50 each.
The average price for Roseville ewes of the Merryville line was $10, down from a height of $70 in previous years.
Richard Buckmaster says the low prices will hurt farmers.
"It's very disappointing. I know we've got bad seasons and everything but I think this is the worst we've had in 17 years of circuit sales," Mr Buckmaster said.
In general, the wool market has eased this week, falling 2 per cent at sales in Sydney, Fremantle and Melbourne.
The eastern market indicator (EMI) fell 18 cents, to finish the week at 826 cents a kilogram.

Stronger quarantine conditions for imported prawns recommended
Biosecurity Australia has recommended tougher quarantine restrictions on prawn imports, which could effectively end the trade.
The domestic industry has called for an end to imports due to disease concerns, although importers oppose any tougher restrictions.
Federal Fisheries Minister Eric Abetz says if the draft recommendations are adopted, most of the countries which currently send prawns to Australia will not be able to prove they are free of disease.

ACCC clamps down on misleading labels
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) is clamping down on misleading claims being made about food and drink.
It has published new guidelines on what can be labelled organic, free range, natural and fresh.
Commissioner John Martin says producers and processors of everything from eggs to fruit juice are increasingly flouting the law but will not be able to get away with it for long.

Legislation blocks grasslands clearing
After three years of wrangling, Tasmania has passed legislation to protect remnant grasslands from land clearing.
The controversial legislation was only passed yesterday in Tasmania's Upper House after a number of modifications were made to the Bill.
Tasmania was obliged under a federal agreement signed in 2003 to protect non-forest native vegetation.
President of the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association, Roger Swain, says the legislation is restrictive but at least provides certainty.

Govt contributes to WA carbon trial
The Federal Government will contribute $60 million towards the world's biggest carbon capture and storage trial in Western Australia.
The money will go to the Gorgon natural gas project off the Pilbara coast, which is still waiting for the final go ahead.
If it proceeds, 125 million tonnes of excess carbon dioxide will be liquefied and buried 2.5 kilometres under the sea bed in saline aquifers .
Environment Minister Ian Campbell says it is imperative the project gets off the ground.
"The Gorgon project, being the biggest one of its type anywhere in the world, in fact bigger than all of the other projects in the rest of the world put together, will help us demonstrate that it can be done safely, that you can put in place a regulatory environment around it, put the risk management techniques around it," Senator Campbell said.

Irrigators discuss compensation with Premier
New South Wales farmers have met with Premier Morris Iemma to ask for compensation for their cut water allocations.
The Government has slashed carry over water allocations for Murray River irrigators by half.
What water is available will only be given to customers near the major supply channels to reduce evaporation.
Chairman of Southern Riverina Irrigators Ted Hatty says the Government has not offered any immediate help.
"The Premier has said that he will look at what he can do, he said we're talking weeks not months, so I suppose that was a positive," he said.

Dairy Aust won't ask farmers to increase service levy
Dairy Australia says it will not ask farmers to support an increased service levy next year.
A poll on the levy will be held in February and March, with farmers to be offered three options.

Better livestock management may prevent rattles disease spread
The thoroughbred horse industry says new research could protect hundreds of foals from the disease known as rattles.
The debilitating bacterial infection is believed to be brought on by dry and dusty weather, and costs the industry millions of dollars a year.
Researcher David Hodgson says better livestock management could prevent the disease spreading.

New president elected to Sheepmeat Council
Australia's peak sheepmeat body has appointed a new president.
New South Wales prime lamb producer Chris Groves will head up the Sheepmeat Council of Australia, replacing outgoing president Ian Feldtmann.

Top drops go down well with National Wine Show judges
The 2004 and 2005 vintages have proved popular with the judges at this week's National Wine Show in Canberra.
Only premium wines that have won other awards can enter, with the main awards going to wines from Margaret River, the Hunter Valley and the Yarra Valley.
Chairman of judges James Halliday says top drops are cheap because of the wine glut.
"2004, 2005, 2006 which are the three vintages which have brought the oversupply issue right onto the front page, happened to have been three very good vintages," he said.
"So if you're going to have too much wine it's rather a good thing to have too much good wine, or very good wine, rather than too much bad wine."
Meanwhile drought, frost damage and lower water allocations are drawing down Australia's wine stock glut faster than anticipated.
The wine industry has revised down its estimates for next season from 900-million litres to 460-million litres.
Predictions for another extreme drought season next year are expected to bring yields down by 20 per cent.
Lawrie Stanford from the Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation says the excess stocks are certainly dropping and that is good news.
"The latest estimate that the industry has is that stocks above a desirable level would rate at something like 460 million litres," he said.

Far north Qld fruit wines in demand
The makers of tropical fruit wines in far north Queensland say they are struggling to keep up with demand.
The wines are made from fruit including passionfruit, native tropical berries, bananas, lychees, rambutans and black sapotes.
Tony Woodall from the Tropical North Queensland Wineries Association says the region has become the world's leading commercial fruit wine producer.
"Some of the fruits are quite bland like grapes and don't make a particularly nice wine," he said.
"Not saying grapes don't, they do of course.

Cole inquiry report finalised
After nearly a year of public hearings, 7,500 pages of court transcript and more than 70 witnesses, the final report of the Cole inquiry is finished.
Commissioner Terence Cole is today handing the document to Australia's Governor-General Michael Jeffery in a brief ceremony at Admiralty House, the official Sydney residence of the Governor-General,
It will advise the Federal Government on the actions it should take against monopoly wheat exporter AWB and two other Australian companies for kickback payments they made to the Iraqi regime in breach of UN sanctions.
AWB was by far the largest contributor, paying more than $290 million.
Huge secrecy surrounds the contents of the report, which will be tabled in Federal Parliament next week.
It is widely predicted Commissioner Cole will recommend the laying of criminal charges against some AWB executives.
The report's contents will also have a bearing on the future of the single desk.
Meanwhile the author of an AWB commissioned report into wheat exports says change to the single desk is inevitable.
But the report says any changes should take place gradually, to minimise the impact on wheat growers.
Former world trade commissioner and report author, Alan Oxley, has warned that any immediate changes could hurt 12,000 grain growers from marginal areas.
"These tend to be farmers who are not in upper income groups who are solely dependent on grain in areas where there is variability," Mr Oxley said.
"So as far as we are concerned they are concentrated in the eastern wheatbelt of Western Australia, and on the Eyre Peninsula (in SA), and in western NSW. They are the ones who tend to rely on the collective marketing of their crops."
But independent grains analyst Malcolm Bartholomaeus disagrees.
He says most farmers would take advantage of an open market.
"I'm not sure that we hold back the entire industry for a smaller group who may have a little more trouble adjusting. Farmers aren't silly, you change the rules and they rapidly adapt," Mr Bartholomaeus said.

Dry conditions to blame for slump in farmers' confidence
The confidence of Australian farmers has slumped to its lowest level in six years.
The state of mind in rural Australia been revealed in the latest Rabobank Rural Confidence Survey.
Just 15 per cent of farmers expect the rural economy to pick up over the coming 12 months compared with 19 per cent last quarter.
The states hardest hit are Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia.
Rabobank's head of rural banking, Neil Dobbin, says ongoing dry conditions are largely to blame.
"This is the lowest confidence farmers have had since the survey started, which is six years ago. Sixty-five per cent of the farmers thought that income would worsen over the next 12 months," Mr Dobbin said.

Tasmania struggling with drought
Conditions continue to deteriorate in Tasmania after record low rainfall and river flows.
The president of the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association, Roger Swain, says the State is experiencing one of its worst seasons in 100 years.
He says while pockets of the State are having a reasonable year, the extended dry and heavy frosts are making the season tough.
"It's quite clearly a drought, you only have to look around and see," he said.
"We're looking at the ground now almost as if it is February here in Tasmania.
The National party's resurgence in country Victoria is continuing, with more votes counted in the state election.
Labor has conceded defeat in the Gippsland seat of Morwell with the seat going to Russell Northe from the Nationals, with the help of Liberal preferences.
The Nationals also took the seat of Mildura from independent MP, Russell Savage, in a swing influenced by Labor's proposal for a toxic waste dump in the electorate.
The Nationals have increased their Lower House numbers by two to nine members in a poll where they feared they would be nearly wiped out by preference deals.

German company buys wool directly through producers
One of the world's major wool spinners has started buying greasy wool directly from merino producers because of high levels of dark fibre contamination in wool being sold through Australian auction rooms.
German company Sudwolle processes 200,000 bales a year at mills in China, Germany and Poland - the equivalent of 10 per cent of the Australian wool clip.
It has been trialing buying wool through an Adelaide firm, which sources bales from a small group of fine wool growers.
Director of purchasing Gotz Giebel blames the high contamination rate on a trend by growers towards sheep which produce both meat and wool, which have more black fibres in their fleece.
"We have initiated that because we noticed a lot of quality problems and due to our size and our market situation we thought we have to do something in the industry," he said.
"Also to encourage growers and that's very important.
"We also want to reward the grower for better qualities."
But wool brokers and buyers in South Australia believe local producers have grown one of the best clips of the past five seasons.
Landmark's state wool manager Trevor James says the quality has held up despite the lack of rain.
"Probably that early rain in March put a bit of feed on the ground and that early rain made a big difference, so we've got a lot of really good length, good sound wools, probably been the best we've seen for five years and we've had some really fantastic wools coming through," he said.

Lamb feedlot shed open for business
One of eastern Australia's biggest lamb feedlot sheds has opened.
Based in Goondiwindi, in southern Queensland, it will house more than 3,500 sheep undercover.
Owner Kerry Corish says they originally expected to sell around 15,000 fat lambs a year but that number has significantly increased due to the drought
"I think at the moment the way it looks and the drought conditions, and because we've bought far more sheep than what we anticipated we would be able to buy, and that's simply driven by the drought and because (of) the large numbers available down south and the price drop in sheep, that we probably will go 20,000 plus, I would imagine," Mrs Corish said.

Cattle prices down
Despite cattle supply numbers being lower in all states, weaker demand at southern markets in the last week had a downward effect on national indicator prices.

Dairy Australia elects new president
A dairy farmer from Bega in southern New South Wales has been appointed chairman of the peak industry body, Dairy Australia.
Max Roberts will replace Pat Rowley to lead the farmer-funded research and development organisation.
Mr Roberts says $57 million in levy money was spent last year to help farmers survive the drought and fight for their rights.
"Our leadership role is [to ensure] the farmers have good information and water again is another good example as the dairy industry is probably the biggest single user in agriculture of water," he said.
"We've got to be able to defend our position and make sure our arguments are good and sound because there's a lot of competition for that water."
Farmers will be asked to vote on three levy options early next year.
Because of the drought, Dairy Australia is asking them to maintain the current levy rate rather than increase it.
Mr Rowley represented dairy farmers at a state, national and international level for more than 30 years.
He also helped create the peak body five years ago and says he is sorry to be leaving at such a testing time.
"I'm sure the industry will no doubt get through this drought and it always rains at the end of a drought, but there will be some people who will struggle very hard and that is sad to me as I go, but it wouldn't matter when I decided to go, there would be some challenge somewhere," Mr Rowley said.

Court closes chapter on native title claims
Members of the Federal Court have donned heavy black robes in 40 degree heat to close a chapter on a series of long-running native title claims in north Western Australia.
At a small community outside of Kununurra, the court granted native title to almost 7,000 square kilometres of the East Kimberley, bringing the total land under native title in the region to 35 per cent.
Edna O'Malley from the Miriuwung Gajerrong Corporation says the ruling not only allows access to country but will bring economic benefits in the future.
"Like the judge said today, it was only a pen to the paper to end 12 years of hard struggle," she said.

Polystyrene fish sculpture aims to raise environmental awareness
The largest murray cod ever photographed is slowly being carved out of polystyrene by communities along the River Murray.
South Australian sculptor and geologist Indiana James has been encouraging people to help him replicate the huge cod, which was nearly two and a half metres long and weighed a whopping 180 kilograms.
He is hoping to raise environmental awareness through his journey which began in 2002.
"Everybody loves a big fish and a big fish story," he said.
"I knew a lot of people would come and talk about the fish, and my real agenda is the health of the river and keeping an awareness of the health of the river in the public eye.

Bill aims to strip AWB of veto powers
Two Liberal senators from Western Australia are planning to introduce a private member's Bill to the Senate today calling for the removal of AWB's veto over wheat exports.
Senators David Johnston and Judith Adams say change is needed whatever the outcome of the Cole inquiry report into AWB, set to be tabled in Federal Parliament this afternoon.
Senator Johnston says even if the Bill fails, the Federal Government should act to remove the wheat export veto immediately.
"With about 70 per cent of wheat growers in Western Australia engaged in harvest, withholding their wheat from the statutory marketing single desk operator, I think it's a crisis and I think it's a crisis that needs to be addressed now," Senator Johnston said.
The National party's resurgence in country Victoria is continuing, with more votes counted in the state election.
Labor has conceded defeat in the Gippsland seat of Morwell with the seat going to Russell Northe from the Nationals, with the help of Liberal preferences.
The Nationals also took the seat of Mildura from independent MP, Russell Savage, in a swing influenced by Labor's proposal for a toxic waste dump in the electorate.
The Nationals have increased their Lower House numbers by two to nine members in a poll where they feared they would be nearly wiped out by preference deals.

Govt assesses wheat export system future
The Federal Government has started considering the future of the wheat export system following the Cole inquiry report.
Federal Government ministers are satisfied they have survived the Cole inquiry unscathed.
But now they are facing the difficult task of deciding whether the wheat export system rorted by AWB needs to be changed.
Liberals including Wilson Tuckey and Bill Heffernan want change.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says his party wants to keep the single desk in some form, although he realises that is not the view of the whole Cabinet.
However he says AWB may yet be part of the solution.
US Wheat Associates, the export marketing arm which represents American wheat growers, wants the single desk removed.
The association's president, Alan Tracey, says Australian farmers have been duped by AWB and the single desk is distorting world trade.
He says the association will support moves by the powerful US Senate Agriculture Committee to conduct its own inquiry into AWB.
"AWB has a subsidiary in the United States, the funds that came from the oil-for-food program moved through US banks," he said.
"There are a lot of connections here and possible violations of US law.

South Korea rejects US beef shipment
South Korea has rejected a US beef shipment over a tiny bone fragment, dealing a major blow to US efforts to recapture the market.
US beef was first banned in Korea after mad cow disease was detected in Washington state in 2003.
US Agriculture Department Deputy Under-Secretary Chuck Lambert is upset, not just that Korea will not accept any bone in US beef, which could transmit mad cow disease, but by the way it handled the initial post-mad cow US shipment.
"It's disappointing that they've gone to the lengths that they have to identify this small, very small piece of bone in more than nine tonnes of product," he said.
The US has asked an international standard setting body to assign the US a mad cow-risk classification but insists US beef meets existing safety guidelines.

Quarantine protocols imposed on NZ avocados
Biosecurity Australia has imposed new quarantine protocols on avocados imported from New Zealand.
The disease avocado scab has been found in New Zealand and is not known to be in Australia.
The new rules will require fruit to be sprayed before harvest and dipped in copper after harvest.
Hugh Moore from NZ Avocado Growers says 90 per cent of the crop comes to Australia in a market worth $30 million and he is rejecting any suggestion that fruit imports should be banned.
"The spraying mechanisms do work and that's in their own science," he said.

Grain handler posts record profit
South Australian-based grain handler ABB Grain Limited has post a record $66.7 million profit for 2005-2006.
The results are up 60 per cent, largely due to expanded marketing, storage and handling operations.
But there are concerns about the ongoing drought.
Managing director Michael Iwaniw says to cut costs, the company is reducing staff and operations, and suspending executive salary increases.
"We've closed 40 receival sites, we have reduced our casual labour significantly and we are looking at transferring our permanent labour force across the states so we'll utilise labour more efficiently, looking at reducing operating hours," he said.
"You'd expect a fall in profits and we've alluded to that.

VFF demands end to Goulburn-Murray water trading
The Victorian Farmers Federation (VFF) wants the State Government to stop water being permanently traded between the Goulburn and Murray River systems.
Currently irrigators on the Goulburn system only have access to a quarter of their annual water allocation, while Victorian irrigators on the Murray can use 95 per cent.
When a water allocation is traded from the Goulburn to the Murray, it is automatically increased from 23 to 95 per cent.
VFF water resources committee spokesman Richard Anderson says as a result, Murray irrigators are now worried their allocations are at risk.
"Once it's transferred down on to the Murray system, the person buying that megalitre of water actually gets to use 95 per cent, being the current allocation on the Murray system," he said.

Hay exporters meeting export demand
Northern Territory hay producers are taking advantage of the drought across the rest of the country to meet export demand.
Five containers of hay are on their way to Korea and Japan.
The Territory's Agricultural Association spokesman, Mal Bishop, says transport costs have stopped them developing an interstate market but there is strong interest in their tropical varieties.
"This year is a really good year to be pushing it because of the dry season down south and in the eastern states," he said.

Local govt rates will curb development: pastoralists
Northern Territory pastoralists say they are worried about the prospect of having to pay local government rates from 2008.
All councils will extend their jurisdiction to include cattle properties, Aboriginal and mining land in less than 18 months.
In the Barkly Tableland, Paul Zlotkowsky of Amungee Mungee Station says the introduction of rates will curb development.
"There's talk that the whole of the area is going to be rated [on] Amungee Mungee, we use 600 square kilometres, the rest of the total area of 3,000," he said.
"The rest of the area that is not yet developed is going to be rated.

Ancient drought blamed for megafauna destruction
A group of researchers say a series of massive droughts 40,000 years ago wiped out Australia's megafauna.
It had been previously thought that over-hunting was to blame.
Palaeontologist Dr Gilbert Price has dug up the fossils of giant kangaroos, emus and wombats the size of cars in south-east Queensland.
He says the remains show the populations had been under stress because of dry conditions, which could provide clues to helping smaller wildlife species today.
"There's so many interesting ecological events that have occurred in the past and these events are recorded in places like the Darling Downs in the fossil record," he said.

Task force to examine AWB charges
A day after Commissioner Terence Cole has handed down his final report into the activities of AWB in Iraq, 12 people are consulting lawyers about their future.
A special task force will investigate whether they should face criminal prosecution.
Former chairman Trevor Flugge is among a group of people who Commissioner Cole has found should be further investigated for possible breaches of the Crimes and Corporations Act.
He is joined by former managing director Murray Rogers and former chief financial officer Paul Ingleby.
Also named are whistleblowers Mark Emons and Dominic Hogan, executives Peter Geary, Michael Long, Nigel Officer and Michael Watson, and former in-house lawyer Jim Cooper.
Charles Stott has been singled out for his involvement in the smelly Tigris affair, involving BHP and a 20,000 tonne wheat shipment.
Commissioner Cole has also recommended the Wheat Export Authority be given more powers and more money to regulate AWB but he has left AWB's veto right and the future of the single desk to be sorted by the Federal Government.
Former AWB managing director Andrew Lindberg says he is relieved that the Cole inquiry has cleared him of any wrongdoing.
But he says it is a matter of great regret that kickbacks were paid to Iraq and he hopes it does not lead to the dismantling of the single desk for exporting Australian wheat.
"Personally, I think that would be a great shame because I do believe it does provide a great benefit to Australia against heavily subsidised competition, particularly from the US and Europe," he said.
"I think it's very important that we don't throw the baby out with the bath water."

Grains Council
The Grains Council has warned the Federal Government not to use the Cole findings as an excuse to abolish the single desk for wheat exports.
The peak grains grower body says while it is shocked by the report, the conduct of AWB can not be confused with the grain marketing system.
Chairman Murray Jones says farmers believe the single desk is the best marketing system available to them.
"We've come out with six basic principles that are there and the key of that is ownership and control by growers, and I guess security of payment for pool participants," he said.
"There are six things and they're on our website. They are quite clear and the government's very well aware of that.

UN head alarmed over Tonga violence
The United Nations secretary-general Kofi Annan has expressed alarm about the recent violence in Tonga.
A spokesman for Mr Annan says he urges the parties in Tonga to persevere with inclusive national consultations to support the democratic reform process.
Mr Annan has said he stands ready to help efforts to foster a broad political consensus.

Govt accused of mishandling response to Cole report
Two former diplomats say the Federal Government has mishandled its response to the kickback scandal, giving an advantage to Australia's international wheat trade competitors.
Andrew Farran, now a trade policy consultant living in Victoria, says the damage to the monopoly wheat trader caused by the Cole inquiry has already caused farmers to lose wheat contracts.
Former Middle East diplomat Bruce Haigh, now farming in New South Wales, says wheat growers will be angry if they lose the single desk as a result of the inquiry.
"I mean the drought is already a huge burden that they're having to cope with and if the single desk gets lost, it'll be an even bigger blow," he said.
"I can say from my conversations with wheat growers, that they're very apprehensive and the potential there is for a lot of anger."
Prime Minister John Howard says the Federal Government is still considering a range of options for the future of the wheat export marketing system but because of the Cole inquiry findings the status quo cannot remain.
Mr Howard acknowledges there are divisions within Government, with the Nationals pushing to keep the single desk and some Liberals demanding the removal of AWB's monopoly.
He says he will put forward recommendations to MPs next week but the solution decided on will be the best one for farmers.
"Any changed arrangements have to be ones that work and have wide acceptability among Australian wheat growers," he said.
"Our main concern is to protect the interests of Australian wheat growers and I am determined that whatever arrangement comes out of the discussion will protect the interests of Australian wheat growers."
Meanwhile United States Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns has directed his department to again consider banning AWB's United States subsidiary from his country's export programs in the wake of the Cole report.
Mr Johanns acknowledges that the AWB had voluntarily agreed last year to not participate in the US Department of Agriculture's (USDA) export credit program but adds that was pending the outcome of the Cole inquiry.
Top USDA lawyer Marc Kesselman says Mr Johanns has ordered him to resume debarment proceedings against AWB.
"The Government can choose who it does business with and the Government usually chooses to do business with people whom it thinks are trustworthy, who are not going to commit fraud with federal dollars," he said.

Agriculture sector remains largest water user
The Australian Bureau of Statistics says agriculture is still the biggest sector user of water in Australia but consumption has fallen by 23 per cent since 2001.
The new water report says farmers and the domestic sector have both responded to the drought, with householders reducing their water consumption by 8 per cent.
Michael Vardon from the bureau says farmers have been particularly responsive to reduced water supplies by planting less demanding crops.
"Certainly cotton and rice were large users in 2002 to 2001 and they continue to be in 2004-2005 but the water use has declined, water use has declined substantially in those industries," he said.

Goulburn wins water-saving award
The residents of one of Australia's driest cities have been recognised for their efforts to conserve water.
Goulburn in southern New South Wales has halved its domestic water usage under stage five water restrictions over the past 18 months.
Now the council has won a National Water Conservation Award for Excellence, ahead of 700 councils from around the country.
Goulburn-Mulwaree Mayor Paul Stephenson says the council is now applying for state funding to install a cover for the Pejar dam to reduce evaporation.
"It still allows the ultra-violet rays to get through to do the normal purification of your water, it reflects a lot of the heat," he said.
"Your blue-green algae problems start to dissipate and you stop all the wind action because these things are moored up reasonably close together.

Water authorities offer jobs to farmers
Victorian water authorities are offering jobs to farmers under a special drought employment program.
The Goulburn Broken Catchment Authority has work for 60 people who are either under-employed or unemployed due to drought or recent devastating frosts in the Goulburn Valley.
Coomboona beef farmer Ewen Mclean is hoping to get paid for the fencing and weed control work he is planning to do on his grazing licence along the Goulburn River.

QCC takes action against coal mine expansion
An environmental group has taken legal action against a coal mine in Queensland, wanting to make it responsible for any pollution its product causes.
The Queensland Conservation Council (QCC) has lodged an official objection to an extension of the Xstrata-owned Newlands coal mine, about 130 kilometres west of Mackay.
Spokesman Nigel Parratt says the company should invest in clean technology or plant trees to offset emissions the extracted coal will produce.
"If it sets a precedent, we'd certainly like to see other high greenhouse gas - either emitters or users - follow suit," he said.

NLIS working at major saleyards
New figures show the National Livestock Identification System (NLIS) is working 99 per cent of the time at two of Queensland's major saleyards at Roma and Dalby.
The Australian Livestock and Property Agents Association says out of more than 650,000 head of cattle, less than 1 per cent either did not have electronic ear tags or had tags that were not read by scanners.
Spokesman Roger Lyne is pleased with the figures but says he expects them to improve.
"As time goes on people are learning how to put them in better, the application rates are much better and I think also the suppliers or manufacturers of the tags are also getting better at it," he said.

Company secures $5m flour export contract
A company formed by six farming families in South Australia has secured a contract valued at more than $5 million to export flour into India.
Flinders Ranges Premium Grain will supply a frozen dough factory in northern India for the next three years, using grain grown on the shareholders' farms at Orroroo in the State's mid-north.
Company chairman Peter Barrie says negotiations have been going on for the past 13 months.
"India is a land of contrasts, it can be overwhelming, their business culture generally is different," he said.

Vic farmer joins Gore climate change campaign
A Victorian farmer has joined the campaign by former United States vice-president Al Gore to increase awareness about climate change.
A group of 85 volunteers will set out across the country to display the slides seen in Mr Gore's documentary, An Inconvenient Truth.
Goulburn Valley fruit grower John Pettigrew says his role is to make the presentation available to farmers.
"It's a matter of getting some Australian or some examples that we'd be more familiar with than some of the American examples he had," he said.
"Most of us can see evidence there that we suspect is climate change.

AWB to split
AWB is planning to split the company in the wake of the Cole inquiry report.
Chairman Brendan Stewart has also announced he will stand down, once the split is approved by shareholders.
As expected, the embattled wheat exporter has proposed to separate AWB International, which owns the single desk licence and service provider AWB Limited to independent companies.
AWBi will be wholly grower-owned and manage the national pool, while AWBl will be listed on the stock exchange and its services to AWBi will be decided in a new agreement to be voted on by shareholders at a February annual general meeting.
Managing director Gordon Davis will also introduce a new executive team to run the company and AWBl's Mr Stewart will stand down in a bid to improve the company's governance.
Meanwhile, BHP Billiton says an internal review into its involvement in the oil-for-food scandal has exonerated the company.
The mining giant was implicated when the Cole Commission heard that BHP Petroleum had delivered a shipload of wheat to Iraq in 1996, worth millions of dollars.
Chief executive Chip Goodyear says the internal review has reflected the Cole report finding that there is no basis for adverse findings against the company.
"BHP and BHP Billiton acted consistently with the UN sanctions and Australian law," he said.

AWB plan 'not a permanent solution'
The US wheat industry has rejected AWB's plan to split the company into two separate businesses.
US Wheat Associates claims the AWB split into a grower-owned operator controlling exports and a commercial agribusiness firm does not get rid of the single desk monopoly targeted by the US.
"We believe that any solution that leaves a monopoly in place in Australia, Canada, wherever it is, no matter how you shuffle the boxes around or shift responsibility from one organisation to another, a monopoly is not a permanent solution," spokesman Steve Mercer said.
Mr Mercer said if the new arrangement leaves in place veto power over private exports with a new organisation or Australia's Wheat Export Authority it is still a monopoly and must be ended.
The Australian Grains Exporters Association is also critical of the split because it will not make the market contestable until next harvest.
AWB will seek the approval of shareholders after its annual general meeting in February.
But association spokesperson Alick Osborne says that is not good enough.
"If this gets up at all, it won't be until the middle of next year which is far too late for growers, particularly those growers in Western Australia, who are trying to make marketing decisions for the wheat they produce this harvest and are not comfortable with the lack of choice being provided to them today," Mr Osborne said.

Graincorp's profit jumps
Eastern Australian bulk grain handler Graincorp has announced a full year after-tax profit of $39.5 million.
The result is a whopping 193 per cent higher than last year's result.
Managing director Tom Keene says the good outcome has allowed the company to pay a dividend of 50 cents a share and pay off $55 million of debt.
But with only 1.9 million tonnes of grain currently in the system, he says the company is forecasting a bleak 2007.
"The outlook for the current year reflects the extensive drought conditions [and] we have already provided guidance on our FY07 [2007 financial year] of a loss of between $20 to $30 million," he said.
"As part of our strategy to manage this we continue to reduce our costs and focus on revenue improvement in a number of our business units."

Cattle processors in for rough ride: AMH chief
One of the country's biggest meat processors says meatworks in southern Australia could close due to falling cattle numbers.
The chief executive of Australia Meat Holdings (AMH), John Keir, has seized upon Meat and Livestock Australia figures that show slaughter rates could fall by as much as 800,000 head next year.
Mr Keir says with too many abattoirs and too few cattle, processors will face very tough times.
"I mean if we're going to see a reduction in the herd and therefor a reduction in slaughter numbers there will be surplus capacity," he said.

Drought and salt tolerant crops to be available sooner
Farmers are set to receive new crop varieties faster with two new plant research centres being set up in Adelaide and Canberra.
The National Plant Phenomics Facility will adapt the latest medical imaging technology to use on plants at the CSIRO in Canberra.
In Adelaide, plants will be moved around on conveyor belts and photographed in 3D as they grow.
CSIRO Plant Industries chief Dr Jeremy Burdon says crops that are more drought and salt tolerant will be available sooner.
"We believe that this will lead to a major increase in the effort that we can apply and through that the speed which we can deliver to farmers important and new invaluable traits," he said.
"And those sorts of traits are obviously those that are at the forefront of all our minds at present and believe will continue to be.

Tax cuts encouraged for bio-industries growth
There is a push in the Northern Territory for tax breaks to encourage the growth of bio-industries, which convert plant and animal materials into commercial products.
Pharmaceutical companies are using bush tucker like the Indigenous plum gubinge because it is the world's richest natural source of vitamin C.
Dr Anna Lavelle of Australia's Biotechnology Organisation says the Territory Government needs to find ways to help investors.
"People often want to invest in biotechnology but not at their own expense. One of the things that I'm going to be looking at in the next 12 months along with governments is to say, well what can we do to encourage investors?" Dr Lavelle said.

El Nino may be benefiting fishing, aquaculture
El Nino weather systems may have a bad name for bringing drought to Australia but they might bring benefits for fishing and aquaculture.
The interaction between weather systems and the ocean will soon be tracked more closely, with the installation of high-tech monitoring equipment along the Australian coast.
South Australian based oceanographer Dr John Middleton says the equipment will give a more accurate picture of the impact of El Nino systems on marine life.
"The research I've done to date suggests they can actually lead to more nutrients available to the food web and thus more productivity," he said.

Bracks names new Agriculture Minister
A former motor mechanic is set to become Victoria's new Agriculture Minister.
Premier Steve Bracks has announced a major shake-up of his Cabinet after his third term election win.
Member for Ripon Joe Helper will be sworn-in to replace Bob Cameron, who moves to the police portfolio.
Mr Helper admits he has been given the role at a challenging time, as many farmers struggle with the drought.
"I've certainly got a lot to learn, there's no question about that," he said.
"I look forward to getting out and listening to farm businesses, to farmers, to communities and farming organisations.

Murray cod fishing moratorium under consideration
Recreational fishing for murray cod in South Australia is under threat because of poor reproduction levels and the drought.
The State Government is looking at a moratorium, worried that more people will catch more cod because of lower river levels.
But recreational fisher Peter Teakle does not agree with a moratorium and says the cod fishing season should be shortened instead.
"I just think that we should show caution - how we are going to construct this moratorium?" he said.

Ultra fine wool bale sells for seasonal record price
A seasonal record has been set for an ultra fine bale of wool in Newcastle.
The 12.4 micron micron bale from the New England area of New South Wales sold for 100,000 cents a kilogram greasy to an Italian weaver.

Fishermen plead with consumers to buy local
With Christmas less than a month away, Queensland fishermen have pleaded for consumers to buy local seafood over the holiday period.
Mackay operator Ruth Amos is struggling to compete with cheaper imported products and is asking shoppers to consider the origin of the seafood they buy.
"It's not that much dearer and you are supporting local jobs," she said.

Rudolph does a runner
There is grave news from the Northern Territory about Christmas.
It seems one of Santa's reindeer might have got lost on Lakefield Station just south of Mataranka.
Gary Riggs almost hit the animal while he was out on a bore run and says it is the first time he has ever seen a deer in the bush.
"I thought jingoes I wished I had a camera," he said.
"Anyway I got home and I called a meeting, and it was all the kids and everyone who's here and I said 'Santa's in a bit of a flap at the moment, he's a bit hot and bothered'.

Govt seeks to strike balance over chemical restrictions
The Federal Government is asking the public whether there should be tighter restrictions on around 80 chemicals widely used in agriculture to try to prevent them being used by terrorists.
Attorney-General Philip Ruddock says the Bali bombings show that terrorists are looking for readily accessible chemicals which are easy to use.
Farmers are opposing the changes regarding chemicals used in fertilisers, sprays, grain fumigants and livestock production, saying there are already industry restrictions in place.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says the Government will try to strike a balance between security concerns and the impact on farmers.
"High risk chemicals are not so freely available as the public might think at present anyway," he said.

Growers to fight imports of NZ apples
Australian apple growers will appeal against Biosecurity Australia's decision to allow imports from New Zealand.
Under the recommendations, tough quarantine measures will be imposed on imports to stop the disease fire blight entering Australia.
But the peak industry body says its 400 page submission on the plan was largely ignored.
Apples and Pears Australia chairman Daryl Ashton says there should be additional inspections of orchards in New Zealand because the disease risks are too great.
"The level of protection, that's the Government's responsibility and we'll be starting to call on the Minister and in fact all parliamentarians to ensure that Australia's level of protection is what it should be and not what Biosecurity Australia wants it to be," Mr Ashton said.
Under the new rules, apple imports will still be banned in WA and the Tasmanian Government is considering imposing its own ban.
Primary Industry Minister David Llewellyn says imports pose a serious risk to the Tasmanian industry.
He says state quarantine regulations could be tightened in response to the import risk analysis.
Meanwhile the New Zealand Government is considering taking action through the World Trade Organisation if the new import risk analysis for apples becomes law.
New Zealand Agriculture Minister Jim Anderton says the proposed quarantine regime will be too expensive for growers and is based on trade protectionism rather than science.
"If we can't get the facts in the way of others' prejudice, we'll have to look at other actions, and the WTO is the last resort," he said.

ALP leadership ballot to clear the air: Beazley
Federal Opposition agriculture spokesman Gavan O'Connor is among Labor MPs who may have to fight for their positions during a party leadership ballot on Monday.
Labor leader Kim Beazley has called the ballot amid renewed speculation about his future.
There has been talk about Mr O'Connor's future since he lost Labor preselection for the Victorian seat of Corio earlier this year.
Mr Beazley says he wants Monday's vote to include all positions, so the frontbench is secure in the run to next year's election.

New plant to ensure supplies of Q fever vaccine
Supplies of the vaccine for Q fever have been secured with the Federal Government to fund a new manufacturing plant.
The only manufacturer CSL had stopped making the drug because it is no longer profitable.
The Government will give CSL $9 million for the new plant, which is expected to start production in mid 2009.
But vice president of the Australian Veterinary Association, Dr Matthew Makin, says he wants CSL to release details of its contract arrangements with the Government.
"I guess we want a concrete guarantee that supply of this vaccine will not be interrupted as it has been in the past, so that we can ensure the safe health of those working in the agricultural sector," he said.
"That's where we've been for the last six months. Supply of the vaccine is running out and it has been rationed, so theoretically people who should be receiving it may not be receiving it."
Hunter Valley farmer Bev Adams, who has suffered from the disease, says the announcement is great news.

Murray River inflows continue to be low
November has been the fifth consecutive month of record low flows into the Murray River system.
Only 50 gigalitres of water entered the system in the past month, compared to the average inflow of 800 gigalitres.
Just 608 gigalitres has entered the system since June.

Former AWB exec steps down from SA company
One of the men potentially facing charges over the oil-for-food scandal has resigned from South Australian company ABB Grain.
Nigel Officer left last Friday before the Cole report was tabled in Federal Parliament.
Mr Officer, a former executive director of AWB, has left ABB following a management restructure.
Industry analyst Malcolm Bartholomeaus says he is not surprised by the move.
"Nigel was one of the former executives who appeared before the Cole Inquiry who did see the light of day at the end and turned to be one of the whistleblowers," Mr Bartholomeaus said.

Wheat competition with India expected to heat up
Australia is set to have some stronger competition in India, with the Indian Government predicting a record domestic harvest.
The world's second-largest producer of grain is anticipating farmers will produce up to 80 million tonnes, compared to last year's 69 million.
India was forced to import wheat for the first time in six years on the back of last year's poor crop.

Farmers rush to sell off cattle
Southern New South Wales and Victorian livestock markets are overflowing as farmers sell off their cattle.
Producers say they cannot hold onto cattle until after the Christmas break because of severe water restrictions in the southern Riverina.
Nicole Varley from the National Livestock Reporting Service says as a result markets could resume earlier than usual next year.
"Everyone's now talking whether or not they are going to go back straightaway after New Year's or whether they'll hold back," she said.

Summit dispels perception of plentiful northern water
A Darwin summit on water resources in northern Australia has been told there is not an abundance of water to support development.
Tropical rivers make up 70 per cent of Australia's freshwater and there has been debate about whether southern farmers should be moving north to escape drought.
But the Northern Territory's Environment Minister, Marion Scrymgour, says the common perceptions are wrong.
"We need to focus on that we have severe rainfall for five months of the year and then plan for the other seven months of the year when there is no rain," she said.
"And we have seen the patterns over the last five years, where we have had a reduction in those rainfall patterns."
"So we can't become complacent, we have to change those attitudes and we have to work together about how do we better educate the communities.

Wool prices ease slightly
Increases in the US exchange rate have not helped the wool industry this week.
Prices eased slightly - the eastern market indicator falling just one cent to 825 cents a kilogram.
Demand was led by China, with European buyers showing keen interest in the Newcastle sale
An Italian company set a seasonal record for an ultra fine bale of 12.4 micron wool this week, paying 100,000 cents a kilogram greasy.

Scientists focus on shellfish to help research climate change
New scientific research is focusing on shellfish in an attempt to unlock the affect of humans on the climate.
A PhD student at the Australian National University is using oysters and mussels from Tasmania, Queensland and New South Wales to track changes in salinity and temperature.
Sarah Tynan says scientists around the world are starting to do similar work.
"I'm hoping to add to the overall picture of climate change," she said.

