"We are exporting a lot of beef into Japan at the present time, but all of it is paying 40 per cent or more tariffs," he said.

Deadline for potential wheat exporters looms
The Federal Government wants potential wheat exporters to submit their applications by Friday, to give certainty to grain growers during the harvest.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran now has the power of veto over export applications, after its removal from AWB in the wake of the Cole inquiry.
Mr McGauran says applications will be assessed on public interest grounds to maximise returns to the industry.

Howard visits Vic firefighters
Prime Minister John Howard has visited firefighters in north-east Victoria, as they continue to battle bushfires which have now burnt 400,000 hectares.
Thick smoke covered Whitfield as residents and Country Fire Authority (CFA) volunteers met with the Prime Minister today.
Made up of beef properties and vineyards, the Whitfield area in the north-east of Victoria has been threatened by fire since lightning strikes hit there a week and a half ago.
John Howard has thanked firefighters for their work, and got a briefing on the fire conditions which are expected to last many weeks.
He also spoke with locals, mostly women, who are busy making cups of tea and sandwiches for the crew.
He will visit the fire ground before flying to Tasmania, where he is expected to make a funding announcement.
Meanwhile cooler weather on Tasmania's east coast is helping firefighters control a bushfire which has burnt more than 11,500 hectares and destroyed 17 homes.
Firefighters are working to contain the fire ahead of forecast hotter and winder conditions tomorrow.
Farmer Stephen Woods, whose two farms near Scamander were already hit by drought, has saved his livestock, but lost more than 100,000 of pasture and another 700 hectares of bush.

Gorgon gas field development given green light
The WA Government has given the environmental nod to the development of the Gorgon gas field on Barrow Island.
The island, off the Pilbara Coast, is a reserve that is home to the rare flatback turtle and other endangered species.

Drought stalls dairy-based managed investment scheme
The development of the nation's first dairy-based managed investment scheme has stalled due to the drought.
Carilla Dairy at Tintinara in South Australia's south-east has failed to find enough cows because of a lack of feed.
The company needs 2,000 head before it can issue a prospectus, but only has 1,200.
Peter Doman from Dairy Management Australia says despite the delays, he is confident the scheme will be successful.
"We're going to try and keep on track, but obviously this year has presented its problems for us," he said.
"We've just got to work towards what we're going to do over the next 12 months. As you said, it's the first dairy farm that's going to be involved in a scheme, we think it'll be sold next year and we think it'll go very very well.
The drought is hitting the dairy sector in general, with milk production dropping below the past two seasons.

EMS accreditation doesn't attract premium price: study
A study has found consumers will not pay extra for food just because it has environmental credentials.
Increasingly farms are adopting environment management systems (EMS), which can cost up to $10,000 to implement.
The Australian Farm Institute has found products stamped with an EMS accreditation do not attract premiums, because consumers expect farmers to be environmentally responsible.
But spokesman Mick Keogh says the EMS system is useful to win new markets.

Aquifers being badly mismanaged: letter
Australia's underground water supplies are in crisis, according to a letter that has been sent to all levels of government.
Written by seven of the country's leading hydro-geologists from the public and private sectors, the document says Australia's aquifers are being badly mismanaged.
Spokesman Dr Rick Evans says on every level, from policy to education, efforts are aimed at repairing rivers, instead of restoring groundwater.

Santa gets helping hand from businessman
An anonymous Sydney businessman has donated $150,000 to buy Christmas hampers for drought affected families in western New South Wales.
The donor says he wanted to let struggling families know that people in the cities do care about them.
Jamie Simmons from Broken Hill's Christian City Church hopes it will make a little difference.

Saleyards industry worried about livestock dumping
With sheep selling for as little as 10 cents a head in some parts of the country, the New South Wales Shires Association is calling on saleyards to waive their fees.
But the industry is worried that saleyards could become a dumping ground for livestock in poor condition.
David Pollock from the Livestock Saleyards Association of Victoria says farmers must consider the welfare of their animals.
"People should consider whether the animal is fit to load and to be transported, and go through the rigours of the saleyard process before it's sent there," he said.
"And if it's not in that condition, well then it shouldn't come to the saleyard."
And the RSPCA is urging graziers to look after their livestock following the conviction of a 54-year-old farmer from southern New South Wales.
Llewellyn Mark Doulman was convicted on 77 breaches of the Cruelty to Animals Act for his treatment of 2,500 sheep.

Court asked to streamline AWI case
Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) has asked the Federal Court to streamline its case against the animal rights group PETA.
The peak wool body wants the claims of 101 woolgrowers heard separately, leaving AWI, Elders Limited and BWK Elders Australia to go to trial against PETA and Animal Liberation New South Wales.
AWI started its case against PETA in November 2004 and joined the woolgrowers to the action in March, 2005.
AWI's counsel told Justice Rares his client proposed corralling the woolgrowers separately for efficiency reasons to streamline the case.
But PETA's barrister Michael Jones said this would prejudice his client because PETA wanted access to the farmers' contracts for sale of wool, financial records and mulesing information.

Weather conditions to test firefighters
Hot and windy weather this afternoon is expected to test firefighters battling a large fire near Tumut, in southern New South Wales.
The fire has burnt 13,000 hectares - mainly pine plantations.
Landholders in the Argalong and Goobruhgandra valleys have been on high alert since yesterday afternoon, when the fire breached containment lines.
A handful of people have been relocated.
Last night firefighters were able to put in new containment lines but with hot north-westerly winds forecast for this afternoon there is concern there might be spot-overs.
Rural Fire Service Commissioner Phil Koperberg is touring the region and an extra 70 fire brigades have been brought in.
A sky crane helicopter is also adding to the aerial attack.
Forests New South Wales will attempt to salvage timber from the burnt pine plantations near Tumut.
At least 10,000 hectares of pines have been burnt so far.
Spokesman Bob Almond says trees that have been blackened can still be salvaged, but there is a time limit.

Milk tankers help out firefighting effort
Dairy processor Murray Goulburn has come to the aid of Victorian firefighters who are battling blazes in hot and windy conditions today.
Milk tankers are being filled with water and taken to the fire front for the Country Fire Authority.
Brad Stokel from Murray Goulburn says the tankers will be used for as long as they are needed.
"We've got tankers available and we put those in the locations that they request," he said.

Bush called on to halt S Korea free trade talks
Key US farm state senators are demanding the Bush Administration end free trade talks with South Korea, until Seoul ends a defacto ban on imports of US beef.
The seven senators made their request after the Koreans rejected three US beef shipments on claims the meat had tiny bone fragments.
Agriculture committee spokesman Keith Williams says the law-makers just ran out of patience.
"Unless the exports of US beef resume and both countries are able to agree on a reasonable and fair bone tolerance level for future shipments, then, anything less than that, would result in the opposition of the senators that signed this letter," he said.

Administrator looks into Co-op's finances
The administrator of a fruit growers' cooperative in southern New South Wales has told grower creditors that they will only get around a quarter of their money back.
The Young District Producers' Cooperative Society, which processed dried fruit, went into voluntary administration with outstanding debts of about $2.6 million.
Administrator Steve Parbery says there are also concerns the Co-op may have been trading while insolvent.
"The question mark arises as to why the Co-op ended up in this position and it would appear that the accounting that was done prior to June 06," he said.

Win for avocado growers in blight fight
Avocado growers have won their fight for tougher restrictions to protect the industry from the fungal disease, avocado blight.
Biosecurity Australia has imposed stronger rules for imported New Zealand avocado, including a ban on any fruit with windrub, which looks the same as blight.
Avocadoes Australia's Chris Nelson says the new protocols could lead to a rise in the cost of fruit for consumers.
"Because there will be less fruit exported to Australia there will be a change in that supply and demand balance and inevitably I guess the prices may rise to a certain extent so they're looking towards probably a better return for the fruit they do send over," he said.
Random inspections will be conducted on Australian fruit orchards this summer to ensure growers are not breaching plant breeders' rights.

Fishing sector angry over marine park plan
Western Australia's commercial fishing sector is angry that is has not been consulted about new marine parks planned for the state's north-west.
The State Government will create the parks, as part of an attempt to protect the environment, once the $15 billion Gorgon gas field is developed on Barrow Island.
But Guy Leyland from the WA Fishing Industry Council says the $130 million sector was not told about the plans, and still knows little about what is proposed.
"We learnt about an hour before the public announcement by the Minister," he said.
"The Minister telephoned us and advised us that this is what the Government was going to do.
"It's just pointing to I think that we weren't consulted more closely in terms of the Government's intention.

Wool prices up
Wool prices have ended on a positive note at the final Sydney auctions for 2006. 
   
The northern wool market indicator has finished on 858 cents a kilo, up 11 cents on last week.
The last sales for the year are being held in Melbourne and Fremantle today, and wool broker Don MacDonald expects prices to stay firm.
"Yes I would think so, supply is now the main issue and I can't see any way the market will flag off today," he said.

Drought expected to drive more from farms
Demographers and farm organisations say the severity of the drought is likely to accelerate the trend of primary producers leaving the land.
The National Farmers Federation says it does not expect an exodus, but the drought will continue the trend of fewer farmers running bigger properties.
Social researcher for the Victorian Department of Primary Industries, Dr Neil Barr, says history suggests fewer young people will become farmers.
"In the census period before the 1983 drought there were 10,000 people aged in their late 20s, 25-30 that entered farming in the five years before it, and then in the late 1980s that had dropped to 6,000," he said.

Bushfire battle continues in Tas
Firefighters continue to battle large bushfires threatening the townships of St Mary's and Irish Town in Tasmania's north-east.
The fire front is about a kilometre north of the towns, near the German Town Road, and fanned by north-easterly winds.
Tasmanian Fire Service district officer Steve Lowe says crews are working on control burning while conditions allow, but are bracing for an unfavourable weather change tomorrow,
"It's still moving quite slowly at this time however the forecast is not favourable for firefighting at all," he said.

Pressure mounts for quick wheat exports decision
Pressure is building on the Federal Government to make a quick decision on wheat exports, with at least half a dozen companies lodging applications.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran now has the final say on who should be allowed to export wheat after the removal of AWB's veto in the wake of the Cole inquiry.
Sources say Brooks Grain, Cargill, Ozepulse and Louis Dreyfus are among several exporters who have lodged the latest bids for around 3 million tonnes.
But Peter Howard from Ozepulse says it is still unclear if the new system will make it easier for AWB's rivals to export wheat.
"It's new so there is a lack of clarity, I mean we're guessing what's going to happen," he said.
"I would hardly consider it would have any adverse effect on the national pool.
"I can't see if you grant another competitor an approval they've still got to buy the wheat, presumably you can't buy it for any less than what AWB are offering you've got to pay more.

Mother of injured horse rider backs hard hats
The Northern Territory's outback community is rallying around a severely injured campdrafter.
Quita Docking is recovering from a head injury she received four years ago, when she was crushed by her horse.
In a miraculous recovery, she has left her wheelchair and learnt to walk, and ride again.
Mother Gladys Docking says she is grateful for local support which helped to send Quita to Germany for stem cell therapy.
She also wants to encourage all riders to wear hard hats.
"Quita was always against it, as a teenager. I was always, always trying to get her to wear it," she said.
"[She] never would, but [I continue to encourage use], now more so than ever. Quita would still have suffered injuries, but they would have been minimised.
"It doesn't take much to have a bit of a hot head for a couple of hours, you can take it off when you are off the horse.

Wool market ends year on high note
The wool market has ended the year strongly, with the eastern market indicator up 14 cents to 839 cents a kilogram.
Following solid gains in the Sydney sales early in the week, prices in Melbourne jumped 16 per cent.
Merino fleece wools were in strong demand, with price rises across all micron types.
Buyers from China have dominated sales this year but a pick up in demand from other countries has been a major factor in lifting the market.

Court date set for AWI case
A trial date has finally been set for Australian Wool Innovation's (AWI) long-running case against the animal rights group, PETA.
The Federal Court will hear the case over two months from October next year.
Legal action was launched against PETA in 2004 after it mounted an international campaign to boycott Australian wool, over the practice of mulesing and live exports.
Les Targ from AWI says the peak body plans to call more than 30 witnesses.
"I won't be specific about names but obviously we'll be talking people who are experts in the area of fly control and experts in the geographic regions, and the effect of flies in those regions, so we'll be calling on a range of experts," he said.

Roma saleyards for sale
Australia's biggest saleyard complex is on the market.
The council-owned Roma saleyards in southern Queensland will most likely be put out to tender in the New Year.
But yard managers are already denying a possible sale will squeeze out smaller independent agents in favour of big companies like Elders and Landmark.
Chairman of the Roma saleyards board Rob Loughnan says it is early days in the tender process and a sale would have to benefit all parties.
"I want to hear from people about whether they think it would be better in private or public ownership," he said.
"Its not just he money we're talking about, if someone wants to buy it just to shut it down in favour of another centre somewhere, you know, away from Roma, so Roma loses the benefit of 400,000 cattle throughput a year, that's not going to be of interest to us," he said.
Major livestock agent Elders has denied it is behind the possible sale of Roma.
Queensland livestock manager, Tony Gooden is rejecting speculation that his company is either interested in buying the yards, or setting up its own facility in competition to the council-run centre.

Tas bushfires wipe out $50m plantation timber
Tasmania's bushfires have destroyed plantation timber worth an estimated $50 million.
About 17,000 hectares of bush has been burnt on the north-east coast since the fire began last weekend.
Kim Creak from Forestry Tasmania says it is too early for accurate assessments but early estimates place the losses in the tens of millions.

Stock losses assessed after Vic bushfires
Government inspectors are assessing stock losses after bushfires in eastern Victoria, which have destroyed about 20 houses.
Hundreds of kilometres of fencing, large areas of pasture and sheds have been destroyed in a number of locations in Gippsland and the north-east ranges, including around Toongabbie, Gaffney's Creek and Cooper's creek.
A 48-year-old man died when he fell off a trailer while fighting a fire near Heyfield in Gippsland.
There have been significant stock losses around Dargo, and Angus Hume, from Victoria's Department of Primary Industries, says farmers need to be ready for more fire fronts in coming days.
"You really must make sure that you have water provided for stock and feed if you have them in containment areas and just those general things that are about planning beforehand," he said.

Climate change to worsen fire situation: report
The farmer-funded Climate Institute says high bushfire danger days will increase by up to a third in the next 30 years, as a result of climate change.
The lobby group has analysed data from the Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, which suggests Australia is likely to heat up and become drier.
Climate scientist Graham Pearman says governments need to decide whether they invest in measures to mitigate climate change now, or boost firefighting resources later.

Farmers under pressure to compete in global trade
A new report backs farmer claims that they are under pressure to cut costs to remain competitive in global trade.
The Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics (ABARE) says while food exports have grown at 10 per cent a year, it is getting harder to make a profit in both export and domestic markets.
ABARE's Lisa Elliston says manufacturers and processors are also under pressure.

Farmers turn to Malaysia for cheap fodder
Dairy processor Murray Goulburn is looking to our northern neighbours for fodder to help farmers feed their cows.
The first shipment of palm kernel extract from Malaysia is due in mid-January.
The extract is a by-product of the palm oil industry, and is made up of ground and dried skins, and the flesh of the palm kernel.
Ross Greenaway from Murray Goulburn says the rising price of grain makes the extract a cheaper option for farmers.
"This first load of palm kernel is $220 plus GST plus freight. That is very cost effective compared to the current price of grain," he said.

Don't ignore depression, doctors urge
Rural doctors say their already tight resources will be stretched as the drought drags on, but they are urging people to seek help for depression regardless.
The Rural Doctors Association says people feeling stressed and depressed to see their GPs early, because problems can become worse the longer they are untreated.
President Dr Peter Riesbieth says rural practices will have to prioritise their appointments, but it is important to ask for help.

Riverina irrigators call for compensation
Riverina irrigators have rallied to voice their anger at New South Wales Government cuts to their water allocations, and are calling for compensation.
Rice farmers, dairy farmers and croppers, already had zero water allocations this season, but since October the NSW Government has cut 52 per cent of farmer's carry over water.
This is water farmers have saved in the previous year, to use in the current drought.
So today farmers are rallying in the streets, to show their anger at the State Government's decision.
Farmers also say a number of towns and 1,500 farming families now could run out of household water and water for stock.

Govt expected to change forestry investment rules
The Federal Government is expected to make changes to the investment rules for Managed Investment Schemes (MIS) for plantation forestry.
It is believed the Government will not remove tax advantages for investors, but instead regulate how much invested money is spent on planting trees.
Liberal Senator Bill Heffernan says he would not object to the changes because Australia needs more trees for environmental reasons.
But he wants the laws changed for schemes for annual crops, like wine, tomatoes, olives and wheat.

Inmates trained to become croc farmers
Inmates from the Darwin Correctional Centre have been trained to become the next generation of Northern Territory crocodile farmers.
Farmer Mick Burns helped to develop the croc handling course, which is designed for prisoners from remote communities where problem crocodiles are common.
He says there are huge growth opportunities for farming and harvesting skin, and meat.
'I think that there is real value in terms of development of the crocodile industry to develop regional satellite farms," he said.
"All we can really do is present the opportunity and make sure that we have the infrastructure and the training, and the like, and then it's really up to the communities.
"So whether they are ex-prisoners or they are not, a lot of it is just about creating an opportunity and we are pretty happy to be doing that.

Wheat export issue divides growers
Wheat growers across Australia are divided on whether Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran should allow AWB's rivals to export wheat.
Mr McGauran now holds the wheat export veto and is considering 44 bids to export wheat to 20 countries after calling on traders to submit their applications.
Farmers disagree on what Mr McGauran should do, but believe opening the market would be the end of the single desk.
"It's too detrimental for the whole grains industry to allow those to take place, it would effectively destroy the single desk as we know it," one farmer said.
"As far as we're concerned as growers, the single desk has run its day.
"To think that you are just going to chuck all that out in one year I think is extremely dangerous, we need to have this debate first and then decide how our wheat is going to be handled."

Farmers debate single desk
Meanwhile Victorian grain growers are debating how they would like their wheat marketed overseas at a major forum in Bendigo today.
Sitting in a hot carpark under a marquee are just under 400 farmers, who have travelled several hundred kilometres from Swan Hill and Horsham, as well as other grain growing areas to have their say on the single desk.
The Victorian Farmers Federation (VFF), who have organised today's forum, wants to retain the single desk and have it controlled by growers.

Qld storms crush fruit and cane crops
Severe storms which lashed south-east Queensland over the weekend have flattened young sugar cane crops and destroyed fruit in the Childers district, near Bundaberg.
Strong winds have brought down trees and power lines, while hail stones described as half the size of cricket balls have damaged crops.
Cane, mango and lychee grower John Muller was set to harvest fruit in coming weeks, but says his crops have been almost completely wiped out.
"There's probably less than 1 per cent of the mangoes hanging on the tree and every one of them has five or six chops out of them," he said.

Program aims to encourage farmers to talk about depression
National organisation Beyondblue is launching a new program today it hopes will encourage farmers and rural communities to talk about depression.
The organisation is launching the first phase of its drought action plan with Incitec Pivot.
Incitec staff will be trained to recognise symptoms of depression and point people in the right direction for medical and financial help.
Incitec employee and sufferer of depression Noel Trevaskis says most staff are relieved they can offer practical support.
"If they're talking to a farmer or a farmer's wife or whoever, then they will be able to have the skills to be able to recognise those signs and symptoms," he said.
"They'll also be able to offer some help and advice as to where people can get help to see them through the problem that they're experiencing."

Farmers fined over land blockades
For the first time, farmers in the central west of New South Wales have been fined for stopping state authorities from investigating claims of illegal land clearing.
Farmers have blockaded two properties at Tottenham at the weekend.
The Department of Natural Resources says it had warned farmer representative that fines would be imposed if access was blocked.
One infringement notice for an $1,100 fine has been served, with another two to be handed out this week.
Department spokesman Steve Dunn says attempts had been made to work with land holders but the department has a duty to carry out inspections.

Farmers assess bushfire damage
As bushfires continue to rage in eastern Victoria, some farmers have had a chance to survey the damage caused by the blaze.
Stock, sheds and houses have been lost so far and landholders are gearing up to protect their properties again as temperatures rise this week.
Gippsland farmers Roger and Kate Bond have lost poultry and sheds, although firefighters managed to save their farm house at Cowwarr and some sheep.
Both are wheelchair-bound and Mr Bond says it is going to take a long time to rebuild.

Cane smut found near Townsville
The crippling fungal disease sugar cane smut has been discovered even further north in Queensland, in the Herbert River region near Townsville.
The disease, which cuts crop yields, had been first found in the Isis and Bundaberg area in June, and more recently in the central region near Mackay.
A two kilometre quarantine zone has been imposed around the latest discovery in the Lannacost area.
Canegrowers chairman Alf Cristaudo says finding the disease in the wetter northern region had been unexpected but growers are prepared.
"We would ask everyone now to be even more vigilant than they have been, it's disappointing and a surprise that we are finding it anywhere," she said.

Apple and pear plantings drop
New plantings of apple and pear trees have fallen by up to 6 per cent.
The latest Bureau of Statistics figures for 2005-2006 also show apple production is down more than 15 per cent on the previous year.

SA Govt accused of mismanaging fish stocks
A long-term prawn fisher in South Australia is concerned about stock levels, accusing the State Government of mismanagement.
An official report in SA has found the prawn catch is only one third what it was in the 1970s.
Commercial fisher Maurice Corigliano says the Government has allowed overfishing in Gulf St Vincent and wants boat numbers reduced.
The Government has had meetings with the fishermen and told them it is their responsibility to ensure the fishery is managed sustainably.
Mr Corigliano says the Minister for Fisheries, Rory McEwen, is dodging the issue.
"It's the Government's responsibility to manage that fishery, they have the power to say how many vessels come in, how many vessels go out, when they can fish, where they can fish, what size prawn they can take, what size vessels they can use," he said.
"Regrettably, he is simply not doing so and is simply dodging the issue."
The Prawn Boat Owners Association disagrees, saying numbers have not depleted and there is no need to reduce licences.
Currently there are only 10 licensed boats.

Govt finalises revamped horticulture code
The code of conduct for Australia's horticulture sector has been finalised by the Federal Government.
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says any new agreements and wholesalers signed after December 15 will be subject to the code.
It is expected to be tabled in Parliament in February and will then become law.

Tas begins dairy cow exports to Pakistan
Tasmanian farmers are exporting live dairy cows to Pakistan for the first time.
About 1,000 cows are sent to China from Tasmania each year but that trade has slowed this season.
Livestock agent Craig Waldron says the new market looks promising, with Pakistan paying $800 a head for cross-bred heifers.
"Given the season on the current returns of what you can expect to buy replacement stock for, it's pretty reasonable to buy a female that was only just recently joined," he said.

Campaign spares Guyra horses
More than 100 horses have been granted a reprieve in the Guyra region of New South Wales after a campaign to stop them being sent to the knackery.
The future of the horses had been uncertain after their death and a farmer providing agistment has asked for them to be moved.
Campaign coordinator Bianca Lyne says there are plenty of people who want to help.
"People have called from as far away as Tasmania and I'm actually getting emails even from overseas," she said.

Economists call for independent national water body
There are calls today for an independent, national body to control Australia's water resources.
Two water economists have put together the plan to remove political tensions between state and federal governments.
One of the plan's authors, CSIRO Professor Mike Young, says a more responsive and consistent system is needed to decide water allocations, trading rules and entitlements.
Professor Young says there is widespread concern that the current system is hamstrung by politics.
"People are very frustrated with what's happening, there's a lot of frustration around the rules over water trading and things like exit fees," he said.
"Every state is taking subtly different approaches, if you had a structure like this it would all be resolved in a unified way, so there'd be no opportunity for arbitrage from one state to another."
But there are concerns from irrigators that the proposal would leave agriculture out of the water reform process.
National Farmers Federation irrigation task force spokesman Laurie Arthur says farmers need to be represented.
"I have real concerns that agriculture will not be front and centre of the debate," he said.
"I'm a little bit concerned at the moment that expertise within agriculture for example, within our irrigation companies, is a bit remote from the decision-making process."

Working together
Meanwhile, peak farm, water, environment and business organisations have agreed to work together to push for improvements in water security for farmers and urban users.
The National Water Commission (NWC) stakeholder group has agreed on priorities, including better water accounting and reporting, and addressing over-allocation of rivers.
Commission chairman Peter Corish says the group realises that bodies outside government can contribute to finding solutions to Australia's water problems.

Vets urge livestock checks in bushfire regions
Vets are urging farmers in bushfire-affected districts to check their livestock once fires have passed through.
In Victoria's Central Gippsland area, 530 beef cattle, 62 sheep and goats and 120 chickens have been lost.
Department of Primary Industries vet Liz Parker says damage from the fires might not show for some days.
"They can look really bad, they can be covered in black and look terrible, but actually they really don't have much damage at all," she said.
"Other animals can look fine but the burns can be in the respiratory tract and sometimes the evidence of that doesn't come up for a couple of days as well, and they can be really life-threatening and the animals might need to be put to sleep."

Communities struggle this season
Meanwhile, it has not been feeling a lot like Christmas in parts of fire-ravaged Victoria, with many communities cancelling festive events due to an increased fire threat this week.
But one country town found the time to host a carols service last night, to give the locals a break from the worries of drought and fire.
Nova Underwood from Heyfield says it has been a stressful week, with the fire coming within 7 kilometres of her property.
"Christmas has been put on the backburner, but we're trying to encourage the spirit this week," she said.

Drought spurs calls to renew healthy sheep flocks
Sheep producers are being urged to take advantage of the drought, to refresh the gene pool of the national flock.
Researchers at the Sheep Cooperative Research Centre have developed new technology to help graziers keep their best sheep, based on their breeding potential for wool and meat.
Stud Merino Breeders Association president Will Roberts says producers are trying hard to hang on to their best animals.
"In a lot of stud flocks and things they're not always age structured, they're quality structured, and it's a little more difficult and people are less reluctant to sell those animals anyway, so they try to hang onto them," he said.

Pork prices climb this Christmas
Demand for pork products has improved this Christmas, with prices lifting at retail level.
The industry has been struggling against major competition from imports during the past few years, not helped by a strong Australian dollar.
But New South Wales pork producer Neil Unger says prices of around 300 cents per kilogram are not keeping pace with increased production costs.
"Our cost of production is very, very close to $2.50," he said.
"We lose probably 20 cents in dockages because we don't like this one, that one is too skinny, that one is too fat.

Turf industry loses out to rising water restrictions
Tightening water restrictions in many parts of Australia are taking their toll on the turf-laying industry.
The industry has lost $15 million this year, as home owners become reluctant to lay grass they cannot water.
Turf Producers Australia spokesman Ray Moir says South Australia has been the hardest state hit by the drought, with its largest business deciding to close its doors after 25 years.
"It's having varying effects from state to state," he said.

Authorities arrest 10 Malaysian farm workers
Ten Malaysian workers have been arrested after allegedly working illegally on farms near Menindee, in western New South Wales.
The group of six men and four women have been sent to Port Augusta in South Australia to face deportation.
Federal Immigration Minister Amanda Vanstone says they will be transported out of Australia as soon as possible.

Recycled water blamed for lettuce damage
Lettuce growers in Victoria fear their crops are being damaged by recycled effluent water from the Werribee Sewage Farm, near Melbourne.
More than half of Australia's iceberg lettuces are grown at Werribee.
The farmers have been using the recycled water since last year, when the State Government banned the use of underground water due to the drought.
Southern Rural Water spokesman Clinton Rodda says an investigation is under way to find out what has caused stunted growth and discolouration of lettuces.
"Certainly the salinity is higher than ideal and this is an interim scheme until, hopefully, the salt reduction program will move to lower salt in the long-term," he said.
"But I think these farmers in Werribee south are very effective in the way they manage their crops, they're aware of the higher salinity.
Some of them have dealt with higher salinity bores for many, many years in the past, so they learn how to deal with those high salinity levels."

Growers face pressure over wholesaler contracts
A Queensland horticulture group says growers have been pressured into signing contracts by wholesalers trying to avoid the industry's new code of conduct.
All contracts signed on or after last Friday are subject to the code, which is designed to improve transparency.
Growcom spokesman Jan Davis says some growers had to sign contracts before Friday, while others were asked to back-date agreements.

NZ suspends Aust honey exports
Plans to export honey across the Tasman have hit a snag, with the New Zealand High Court suspending the trade until a full biosecurity risk assessment is completed.
Biosecurity New Zealand had given the nod to imports, but beekeepers appealed the interim decision, claiming Australian honey contains diseases that could threaten the local industry.

Aust vegetable imports outweigh export, growers say
Vegetable growers say Australia is importing far more produce than it exports.
Most of the surge has been for frozen and processed vegetables, particularly potatoes.
Peak grower body Ausveg says imports have jumped by almost 35 per cent in the last four years, to $375 million.
Ausveg spokesman Ian James says the trend is concerning, especially when vegetable exports have dropped back because of a loss of markets.
"Some of these frozen vegetables reflect renewed or different sourcing policies of the food processors in Australia, in particular, over the last 12 months anyway, a switch from Australian-sourced product to New Zealand-sourced product," he said.
"But there has also been some substantial increases in imports coming from the European Union as well."

Emergency services failed to tackle fire: report
An investigation into the 2003 Canberra bushfires has highlighted a failure to attack fires early and a failure to warn the public of impending danger.
Four people were killed and 500 homes destroyed in the blaze, which started in the mountains, west of Canberra.
The coronial report makes more than 70 recommendations, but there is concern over how the ACT Government will respond.
ACT coroner Maria Doogan has handed down 15 findings on the cause of the fire.
Among them, the ACT Emergency Services Bureau had failed to aggressively attack the fires.
They withdrew crews on the night they started, fire trails were overgrown, and there were heavy fuel loads.
She also found that in the face of drought and extreme fire conditions, the bureau had inadequate maps, planning, bulldozers and other support for fire crews.
The coroner has acknowledged that the ACT Government had already given more statutory power to emergency services, but had since returned the fire control to answer to bureaucrats with no special emergency management knowledge.

Science students needed to combat future climate change
A lack of students wanting to study agriculture and science is causing concern.
Universities and scientific bodies say the shortage could hurt Australia's ability to cope with issues like climate change and natural resource management.
The University of Sydney is blaming negative perceptions of the rural economy due to the drought, despite strong demand for graduates.
CSIRO spokesman Murray Cameron says a shortage of maths graduates has already delayed some of its research programs.
"A lot of Australia's history in agriculture, for example, has been in our ability to use genetics to breed better animals, better plant species, a lot of that in the future is about using mathematics effectively," he said.

Fortescue gains access to BHP Billiton rail lines
The Federal Court has given Fortescue Metals Group open access to BHP Billiton's iron ore rail lines in Western Australia's Pilbara region.
The decision means BHP Billiton can no longer stop other companies from using the Mount Newman and Goldsworthy rail lines, despite claiming them as part of its own production process.
Foretescue has successfully argued that the lines were a 'service', under the Trade Practices Act and should be available to all companies who need them.
Fortescue spokesman Graeme Rowley says the court has upheld a right to fair competition.
"We not only now have achieved success for ourselves, but we've also achieved success for Australia," he said.
"We now go to the Australian Competition Tribunal to ask them to approve effectively our access to that infrastructure.
"That overturns the Treasurer's decision that we could not have that access."

Cattle ID scheme issues being resolved: NLIS chairman
The chairman of the National Livestock Identification Scheme (NLIS) for cattle says problems with the scheme are being addressed.
A leaked copy of an audit of the scheme, commissioned by the federal Agriculture Minister, has highlighted problems with farmer cooperation, scrutiny of the system and different levels of state compliance.
Chairman John Wyld says the NLIS is working well overall, but admits there are weaknesses, including the lack of a back-up plan if Telstra's systems supporting the database go down.
"Our contract with Telstra requires a full disaster recovery plan," he said.
"Now I'm aware there is an ongoing issue between MLA and Telstra, but it's really a matter that Telstra's not been able to comply with but it's part of our contract.

Drought blamed for lucerne crop failure
Dryland lucerne production in the upper south-east of South Australia has been hit hard by the drought with virtually no hay cut this year.
The area between Tintinara and Naracoorte is generally regarded as one of the nation's biggest lucerne hay-producing regions but has recorded its lowest rainfall totals in a century.
Charlie Hilton from Lucerne Australia says if there is no rain in the next three months, it is possible some long-established lucerne stands will be lost.
"If stands have thinned out to be not economic to leave, they are going to have to be re-established," he said.
"Once you do that, you virtually lose production off those dryland paddocks for a year.

Turf grass producer bites the dust
Tightening water restrictions in many parts of Australia are taking their toll on the turf-laying industry.
The industry has lost $15 million this year, as home owners become reluctant to lay grass they cannot water.
Ray Moir from Turf Producers Australia says South Australia has been hardest hit by the drought.
"It's having varying effects from state to state," he said.

Darling River weirs may prolong water period
Two temporary weirs have been built on the lower portion of the Darling River in far western New South Wales to shore up water supplies.
The weirs, about 50 kilometres north of Wentworth, are built from compacted clay banks containing large pipes and regulators.
Alan Whyte from Jamesville Station says it will not drought-proof the Darling, but it will give landholders a more reliable water supply.
"We know the river is going to cease to flow within two or three months' time," he said.
"There was an opportunity to put some banks in to hold up a bit of water particularly for a few people who are below the existing Tulney Weir.

Canberra bushfires report damning
Landholders west of Canberra who warned authorities about the impending fire danger in early 2003 say they have been vindicated by an investigation into the subsequent bushfires.
The ACT coroner has released a damning report on poor preparation and fire management for the blaze, which killed four people and injured 400 others.
One of the report's major recommendations is that the Emergency Services Agency be reinstated as an independent body that is not answerable to bureaucrats.
Val Jeffery, a long-term firefighter who is credited with saving his village of Tharwa, says someone should be held responsible for the disaster.
"There's a stark lesson here for the rest of Australia," he said.

Community 'weary' from bushfires
With temperatures set to rise in Victoria in coming days, landholders in the state's east are once again gearing up to fight fires that are threatening private property.
The fires have been burning for almost two weeks, destroying more than 700 hectares.
Gippsland farmer Julie Duffy says many landholders, families and volunteers are becoming exhausted by the ongoing blaze.
"The whole community is weary," she said.
"The CFA has worked tirelessly.

Fuel thefts causing concern
Aviation fuel is being stolen from some remote Top End airports and there is concern the thefts could pose a major safety risk.
Charity charter company Mission Aviation Fellowship says up to 60-litre batches of fuel are being taken from aircrafts in the small communities of Milingimbi and Raminging in Arnhem Land.
General manager Ian McBride says people are stealing the $2 per litre fuel on a fortnightly basis to use in their own vehicles.
"Our main concern really, over and above the loss of the fuel, is the safety aspect," he said.
"Where aircraft get tampered with and fuel caps get left off and possibly fuel tanks contaminated.

CWA distributes Xmas cheer to drought-stricken families
The Country Women's Association (CWA) has distributed some Christmas cheer to 680 families and 40 communities in drought-stricken New South Wales.
The state branch of the CWA has been allocating emergency funds as part of a Federal Government aid program in October.
Up to $2,000 has been available to families to meet food and utility costs, while grants of $3,000 have helped towns to hold community events.
Vice president Colleen Wills says the money has gone where it is needed most.
"To keep the phones going, car, for petrol, to get to town to do the shopping, to doctors - it's all the basics," she said.

'Santa' drops in on remote stations
Planes flying to remote stations are being loaded with hundreds of kilograms of presents in the lead-up to Christmas.
Alice Springs-based Chart Air has flown to up to 60 properties across the Northern Territory this week to deliver mail.
Pilot John Zonaras says he has been re-named Santa because half his mailbags contain gifts.
"The mail and that sort of stuff has definitely increased in volume," he said.
"Like today I had a mail run with 42 mailbags and about 350 kilograms so probably a good 150 kilograms of it was presents.

AWB payments to Saddam regime not bribes: ATO
There has been a strong surge in AWB's share price today after the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) cleared the company of any wrongdoing in an investigation of payments made under the oil-for-food program.
Findings from the Cole inquiry said AWB wrote off payments under the oil-for-food program as tax deductions, including those to trucking company Alia.
It had been thought the company may have been liable for up to $450 million in penalties and unpaid tax.
But in a statement to the stock exchange, AWB says the tax office has found the payments did not constitute bribes to foreign public officials under the Income Tax Assessment Act.
The stock market has reacted favourably, with AWB shares gaining more than 7 per cent this morning, trading at $2.81 shortly before 10:00am AEDT.
Meanwhile AWB's rivals are being asked for details on their prices, returns to growers and the effect their applications might have on the national pool.
The conditions are set out in a letter from the Department of Agriculture sent this week to all the companies that want to export wheat.
The letter says the Government wants more information as it tries to establish the 'public interest' value of each application.
Exporter Peter Howard from Ozepulse says some of conditions are surprising.
"I think it's unusual - we've always thought and argued in the past that any applications approved wouldn't really have any effect to the detriment of the pool," he said.
"But I guess it's a point in question looking at what the cost might be to those pool participants, would they increase if these applications are granted.
"Perhaps they would, but our answer is that surely AWB should be reducing those fees to those pool participants."

NSW, WA support single desk
In another development, New South Wales grain growers have stepped up the battle to save the single desk wheat export system at a rally in the Riverina.
Farmers in southern New South Wales have precious little wheat to sell this year, but about 350 were in Narrandera to show their support for the single desk.
Local farmer Hugh Hart says it maximises returns to growers in a corrupt world market.
"Give the power of veto back to the company," he said.
"Let them get on with the job and let's all look forward, so when it starts to rain we can make a quid again and cut all this rubbish out.
"We've had enough - no more inquiries, no more consultation, just get on with the job."
Nationals MP Kay Hull says farmers need to voice their support for the single desk to silence a noisy minority in the Federal Government.
National Party Senators Ron Boswell and Barnaby Joyce are expected to address the crowd.
In Western Australia, 200 growers have also backed the single desk at a public meeting in the Wheatbelt town of Mingenew.
Farmer Peter Hord says the meeting will probably come to nothing.
"It seems to be typical of all of the meetings that have taken place," he said.
US TAKES ACTION AGAINST AWB
US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns has temporarily banned wheat exporter AWB from using his department's programs, in the wake of the Cole Inquiry.
Johanns acted following his directive last month that USDA resume debarment proceedings against AWB.
He says he's suspended AWB, several individuals and a Minnesota commodities firm from USDA programs or purchases.
"The extent of our ability to act here is debarment.
"Now, Congress may look at this and say there's a need for a legislative approach. They certainly have a right to do that.
The suspension does not prevent Australian wheat from being sold in the US or affect AWB's ability to trade on commodity exchanges.
AWB spokesman Peter McBride says the programs have only ever been a small part of the business.
They include US government subsidies and loan guarantees for selling US crops overseas.
He says the company voluntarily withdrew from the programs, when the UN inquiry into the Oil for Food program began.
"We have not used this export subsidy program since early 2004 and we informed the USDA earlier this year that we would voluntarily stand aside from using the program in the foreseeable future.
"So we'll continue discussions with the USDA going forward, but we haven't used the program in a long time and we didn't envisage using it".
AWB's shares continue to trade strongly after yesterday's clearance by the Australian Tax Office.
The ATO has accepted that payments made under the Oil-for-Food program did not constitute bribes to foreign public officials, under the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Austock analyst Paul Jensz says the ruling is worth around 50 cents to the share price.
"It's one of the first bits of positive news to come out of what has been a fairly devastating year.
"This does help the momentum inside the company and the renewal and the change that they're doing on a cultural level and a cost level".

Not enough full-time doctors
While rural Australia continues to cry out for doctors, there's now alarm over the falling number of doctors willing to work full time.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare says the number of full-time GPs fell more than 30 per cent between 2000 and 2004.
It says some country residents are now waiting up to three weeks for an appointment.
Dr Peter Rischbieth, from the Rural Doctors Association, says the holiday season will put extra pressure on rural communities.
"There are some towns that have massive influxes of population through the tourist and holiday season, and some of these towns do struggle to provide appointments for both their residents and the tourists who are arriving, as well as some doctors understandably wanting to have leave during this time with their families"

Wool growers advised to keep sheep
With the best demand conditions for wool in five years analysts are urging farmers to hang onto their sheep, with strong prices expected to continue into 2007.
Although the costs of hand feeding are proving difficult to meet for many wool producers, some analysts think prices could reach ten year highs in the New Year.
Chief economist at Woolmark Chris Wilcox says the lower forecast in production is also keeping demand strong.
"The questions that I was being asked in China revolved largely about supply concerns.
"That, I think, will without doubt help support demand, certainly in the first quarter of 2007. It is worth persisting particularly into the first quarter and maybe a bit beyond".

Banks back victorian farmers
It's been a pretty grim season for grain growers in Western Victoria, but the major banks are confident that there is still a future for farming in the region.
Senior staff from seven leading banks have attended forums this week to reassure farmers that they aren't planning to foreclose on properties.
Bill Dean from the NAB says banks have worked hard over the past decade to improve their relationships with farmers.
"I think the most important thing for farming customers is to keep the lines of communication open, to sit down with their bankers, explore the options and work out where they are going to go. 
"In the majority of cases, we're seeing customers that, whilst they are concerned about what has happened in the last 12 months, they are very confident about the long term future, as the bank is".

Confidence about gm wheat trials
Victoria's first crop of genetically modified wheat could be in the ground as early as next year, despite a state moratorium on commercial crops of GM canola.
The Government has applied for a permit and hopes to have trials of the drought resistant wheat approved by June next year.
Dr Bruce Kefford from the Department of Primary Industries is confident of the trial's success.
"This is work we have done in collaboration with the CRC for Molecular Plant Breeding, some colleagues in South Australia, and other parties.
"There are actually a number of lines which have a number of potential treatments for drought resistance in them and we've got about thirty lines that will be trialled in quite small trials if it's approved".

DAIRY FARMERS FEAR FEED PRICE RISES
The dairy industry is worried that a high level of wheat exports could affect local feed grain prices.
The Federal Government is expected to announce tomorrow, whether it will allow companies other than AWB to ship wheat overseas.
Head of Australian Dairy Farmers John McQueen says any further increases in grain prices would hurt the industry.
"As far as domestic prices go, it should make no impact whatsoever, and we would be very disappointed if exports did anything to domestic prices.
"Domestic prices should not at any time go above import parity and our preference would be lower than import parity.
"Export licences should not give a green light to anybody increasing domestic prices for grain".

LOCAL FISH COSTLY FOR CHRISTMAS
The Sydney Fish Markets are preparing for the Christmas rush, with 80,000 customers expected through the doors this weekend.
But they'll be faced with an expensive decision about whether to pay higher prices for local produce, or buy cheaper frozen imports.
The price contrast is expected to be even greater this Christmas, with the markets' biggest supplier facing its worst year in four decades.
Russell Creighton from the Clarence River Fisherman's Co-operative says drought has claimed another casualty.
"The seafood catch has probably been one of the lowest I've experienced and I've been here for forty years.
"And the contributing factor playing a big part is the drought, because there's no nutrient running into the river, and the rivers are the nursery for both inshore and offshore species of prawns and crustaceans. So we're really feeling the pinch this Christmas".

BEE INDUSTRY BUZZING
Beekeepers in eastern Australia are having mixed fortunes.
The eucalypts are bursting with flowers and nectar in southern New South Wales, but low world prices, bushfires and drought are hurting.
Seventy per cent of Australian honey comes from eucalypts, and right now the gums in the Southern Tablelands are full of flowers.
Doug Sommerville with the NSW Department of Primary Industries says it's in response to a break after the last drought and the intensity of this one: "The fellas are making good honey right now, off snow gum, yellow box, red gum, all in the nice quality honey".
But he says disaster is imminent with the drought continuing and beekeeper Greg Roberts says the fires of 2001 and now are devastating.
"It takes many, many years for species such as stringybark to come back after fire."
With low world honey prices, Australian beekeepers are switching from exporting honey to exporting live bees to the US, under the free trade agreement.

REMOTE BUT EFFECTIVE
A new survey suggests that landholders in isolated areas should be using remote monitoring technology to save more time and money.
The Kondinin farm research group travelled Australia looking into technology, such as virtual fencing, walkover weighing and remote controlled helicopter mustering.
And Research and Development Manager Ben White says they found remote water monitoring had the most potential to improve efficiency on properties.
The report, funded by Meat and Livestock Australia, will be released in February.
KIWI WOMEN CHIP IN TO HELP IN BUSHFIRE BATTLE
New Zealand farming women are offering help to Australian families affected by the bushfires.
Rural Women New Zealand is trying to find out what help is needed, so members can raise money, or send food parcels.
President Sherryl Dackers says the group has been in email contact with similar women's networks in Victoria.
"From Australia we've had the suggestion that we may be able to support some women who probably after this disaster won't be able to afford to go to a conference which is being held in Australia, and also with food parcels.
"What we as rural women New Zealand would like know is what your rural people would need in way of assistance".

AT ONE WITH TUNA IN BRINE
Forget swimming with the dolphins. Tourists can now swim with the most valuable fish in the sea - tuna.
In South Australia, a Port Lincoln charter company will allow people to swim in a sea farm with about 100 tuna fish, worth up to $5,000 each.
Matt Waller, from Calypso Star Charters, reckons there'll be plenty of interest.
"I've seen them sit behind a boat at 10 to 12 knots, sort of 15 to 20 kilometres an hour for up to half an hour. I've seen quick reflex speeds of probably 40 to 50 kilometres an hour.
"They travel all around Australia, around the world, and they return to the same places year after year.

AWB payments to Saddam regime not bribes: ATO
Cattle ID scheme issues being resolved: NLIS chairman
Drought blamed for lucerne crop failure
Turf grass producer bites the dust
Darling River weirs may prolong water period
Canberra bushfires report damning
Community 'weary' from bushfires
Fuel thefts causing concern
CWA distributes Xmas cheer to drought-stricken families
'Santa' drops in on remote stations

Stallholders fed up with Christmas produce
Stallholders at fresh food markets around the country could be suffering from festive fatigue.
Fruit and vegetable sellers, as well as seafood and poultry stall owners, seem to be a bit reluctant to eat their own produce this Christmas.
Here are some views from Melbourne's Queen Victoria Market.
"We've already 'mangoed' out, the kids don't want any more," one stallholder said.
"I don't really go for the turkey at Christmas lunch, I generally go for more ... lamb or beef or something," another said.

Poor harvest disappoints NT grape growers
There is financial pressure on Northern Territory table grape growers after another disappointing harvest in the major production area.
Nematodes and termites have meant that most of the vines in the Ti-Tree region have had to be replanted in recent years.
The president of the Northern Territory Grape Producers Association, Greg Kahl, says producers expected higher yields from the young vines in the next few years.
"We've been battling on for a number of years, our production still hasn't got back to the levels, 2000/2001 harvest," he said.
"Basically on expectations across the board [we're] about 60 per cent down.

New owner for Cowra abattoir
An abattoir in central western New South Wales, at the centre of a row over the Federal Government's workplace reforms, has a new owner.
The previous owner of the Cowra abattoir sacked 28 staff under the WorkChoices legislation and then offered to reinstate them at a lower rate.
The plant was handed over to adminstrators in August this year and then closed.
New owner Chris Cummins says major changes will have to be made to make the abattoir viable.
"Obviously we will have a reduction in staff," he said.
"The place failed before because it was over-manned.
"For a start there will be working an eight hour day, which wasn't the case before.
"All the chains will be wound back.
"We will have a pretty good product coming out of there, probably as good a product as anywhere on New South Wales will come out of there.
"It's a good plant and needs a little bit of money spending on it, it is in a great position.

King Island to sign Kyoto protocol
Tasmania's King Island is planning to sign the Kyoto protocol and formally commit to reducing its greenhouse emissions.
While the island is well-known for its clean and green produce, residents believe that signing the agreement would further boost its reputation.
Mayor Charles Arnold says he hopes the move will also send a clear message to the Federal Government, which is refusing to ratify the protocol.
"Our politicians think by their hip pocket and if they see that the people in the community want to stand up and be heard, I think that's what should happen," he said.

US considers farm spending cuts
The US administration is openly discussing the need to cut US farm spending, even before a possible resumption of world trade talks.
US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns told a reporter recently that the US farm support system may be sitting in quick sand, under challenge abroad in the WTO (World Trade Organisation) and under fire at home with a budget strained by wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
"We're doing all we can to get the federal budget under control," he said.
"The leadership now of the House and the Senate have talked very, very publicly about this notion that you have to pay for things as you go.
"Those are strong messages that the budget is going to have an impact on policy."

Woolworths CEO details drought relief strategy
Sustainable agriculture, drought relief and climate change are the three issues dominating the agenda for the new boss of Woolworths.
Chief executive Michael Luscombe says the supermarket chain has plans to create 'green supermarkets', improve the company's waste management and reward producers whose farms are environmentally friendly.
Mr Luscombe says in the short-term, the company is working with the Country Women's Association on a special drought relief project.
"We have decided that we're going to have a national drought relief action day on the 23rd of January," he said.
"And on that particular day in 760 supermarkets we're going to donate the profit from that entire day's sales to drought relief."

Early Christmas gift for central NSW farmer
Christmas has arrived early for at least one lucky farmer in central New South Wales.
With water supplies so critically low, many landholders will not be spending the festive season with families who live far away because they cannot risk leaving the farm for even a day in case stock run out of feed and water.
But Paul Stewart from Mudgee was lucky enough to be under an isolated thunderstorm yesterday that has revitalised his Christmas spirits.
"Almost every dam was empty and almost every dam is full to overflowing," he said.
"It was beautiful to watch because we had absolutely no chance of getting away at all with worrying about troughs and pumping water from here to the stock, but we won't have to worry about that now."
The weather bureau is forecasting possible isolated showers and storms late today and tomorrow over most of New South Wales.
A rain band is moving in from the south-west and rain is forecast this weekend right across the state.

Thunderstorms bring welcome rain to Eyre Peninsula
There has been a wide range of rainfall totals recorded in South Australia, as a result of large thunderstorms which crossed the state overnight.
While the rain barely settled the dust in some areas, dams were filled on the eastern Eyre Peninsula and through the state's mid-north.
Jan Girdham, who farms between Kimba and Cleve, had one of the highest totals with 52 millimetres.

MIS plantation forestry tax incentives to stay
The Federal Government has decided not to remove tax advantages for investors in plantation forestry under managed investment schemes (MIS).
But under new changes it will change the law, to ensure that at least 70 per cent of investor's money is spent on trees, instead of other projects.
Farmers believe the scheme creates unfair competition for land and water, but assistant treasurer Peter Dutton says the farm sector also receives help.
"The Government has put in place a deliberate strategy to make sure that we support the forestry industry," he said.
"At the same time we have provided many other tax incentives and support through the tax system and government policies and otherwise for traditional farming measures such as the Farm Management Deposit Account so it's about providing a balance."
The Government has also launched a three-month review of the taxation of non-forestry MIS for crops such as grapes and tomatoes.
But there is criticism from the investment and the farm sector over the continuation of the timber tax deductions.
Former rural banker and agricultural business consultant David Cornish says the Government has done nothing to address community concerns over the impact of plantations.
He says traditional farm enterprises are being overlooked.
"These are just massive tax distortions or subsidies which are leading to distortion of capital into rural Australia," he said.

Govt to buy back more scallop fishing licences
The Federal Government will buy back another 150 fishing licences as part of its program to reduce over-fishing in Australian waters.
The new scheme includes one third of the scallop fishers in the northern prawn fisheries and 14 per cent of Bass Strait scallop fishers.
Their earlier applications for buyouts were not considered good value by the Government.

McGauran approves non-AWB wheat export contracts
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran has approved two wheat export contracts for companies other than AWB.
One of the contracts is for 300,000 tonnes for Wheat Australia to ship wheat to Iraq, where AWB has been banned from trading and one for Western Australian-based CBH of 500,000 tonnes to Indonesia.
Mr McGauran says of the 46 applications received they were the only two considered to be in the public interest.
He says AWB has given assurances the two applications will not have an impact on national pool returns.
As a condition of the export permits, both Wheat Australia and CBH must contribute $4 a tonne to the national pool up to a total of 800,000 tonnes.
Meanwhile, the head of AWB International has warned the Federal Government he will have no other choice than to wind up the company, if its veto over wheat exports is removed permanently.
AWB International chairman Ian Donges says the Government must be careful in what it decides.
"I think a lot of commentary has been around," he said.
"We can have the the bulk veto powers with someone else and have a permit system along side a single desk system.
"Quite clearly you can't do that.
"If the single desk closes down or in fact changes to the point where we don't have a future for the say [in] the 2007 pool then we will phase out of business.

Early grain harvest sees farmers enjoy pre-Christmas activities
Victorian grain farmers are being roped into Christmas preparations by their families, with harvest finishing early.
Usually most croppers are stripping paddocks right up to and after Christmas day, but the drought has had a drastic impact on yields.
Grain growers say the extra time this year is a mixed blessing.
"I actually didn't sow a crop this year, so maybe I'll have an early Christmas, a nice early Christmas," one grower said.
"Had a bit more Christmas shopping time, so it's good to get that done instead of at the last minute," another said.
