
US lawmakers urged to oppose food aid commodities plan
US farm groups are angry at a plan by the Bush administration to spend almost a quarter of its main food aid program on Australian and European commodities.
Wheat, soy, rice and other minor crops are involved.
The groups have written to US lawmakers urging them to oppose the Bush administration's plan to buy food aid commodities from Australia and others, closer to needy areas like South-East Asia.
US Wheat Associates' Dawn Forsythe says the proposal amounts to as much as $305 million.
"Twenty-five per cent of the budget would be purchased elsewhere. Now, we have a problem with that ... with US taxpayer money going to buy competitors' products," she said.

NZ growers question Australian fire blight detection skills
New Zealand apple growers have questioned the ability of Australian quarantine workers to inspect their orchards for the plant disease fire blight.
Inspections would be carried out as part of new regulations to allow New Zealand apple imports into Australia.
Submissions on the draft regulations close next week.
But Pipfruit New Zealand's Peter Beaven says Australia does not have the skills to detect fire blight.
"The draft contemplates AQIS inspectors coming out to New Zealand and doing work that I don't think they are qualified to do, quite frankly, because you know they are going to be looking around orchards, looking for canker and so forth and they've got no experience in doing that," he said.

Live export campaign to improve welfare
Meat and Livestock Australia will fund a million dollar campaign to raise awareness of its efforts to improve animal welfare, particularly in the live export trade.
The campaign will begin in WA in a few weeks before being launched nationally, targetting consumers, metropolitan media and schools.
Tim D'arcy from the Pastoralists and Graziers Association says he hopes it will make the live export industry more transparent as well.
"You know, there are people out there who still don't do the right thing, and we're aware of that," he said.
"And we're trying to, through this process, trying to encourage everybody, to ensure their animal welfare management is of the highest order.

Dairy farmers needed for Tasmania
Tasmania's dairy industry has launched a recruitment drive to attract more farmers.
The campaign has the theme "a great place to live, a great place to dairy", and promotes not only the sound economics of dairy farming, but the lifestyle qualities of living in Tasmania.
Dairy consultant Basil Doonan says while there has been a big influx of New Zealand farmers in the past decade, this campaign targets Europeans.
"We don't mind where the investment comes from, we just need foreign investment, we need an injection of capital at the farm level in the Tasmanian industry," he said.

Dairy industry rallies behind FNQ producers
The Queensland Dairyfarmers Organisation (QDO) has set up its own cyclone relief fund to provide help to farmers affected by cyclone Larry.
The cyclone damaged infrastructure, and power is still out in many dairies five days after it hit.
Without power farmers cannot milk and cows face the possibility of mastitis and going dry.
There has been a major effort to fly in mobile milking machines, source generators and even fly in a tanker so milk that can't be chilled can be picked up every day, otherwise it has to be poured down the drain.
QDO president Wes Judd says farmers across the country have offered their help and any donations will be most welcome.

Cave on standby as waters rise in Kimberley
Residents of stations and communities in the east Kimberley are on stand-by to evacuate as rain continues to bucket down in WA's far north.
Kununurra has had double its average March rainfall, with 200 millimetres over the past two days.
Yesterday a helicopter arrived at nearby Ellenbrae Station to collect the Stanley family, although farmer Norm Stanley decided to stay on.
"I can't see anyone coming to too much grief," he said.
"We've got a big hill about a kilometre over from the homestead and I'll shoot across there if it gets too bad.

Top End crabbers facing tough times
Commercial crabbers in the Northern Territory say the industry will be forced to downsize under major new restrictions.
Thirty per cent fewer crabs will be able to be caught under amendments to the Territory mudcrab plan and there will be tougher penalties for breaching catch limits.
Chris Calogerous of Sea King Seafoods is disappointed there is no provision to buy out any of the 49 commercial licence holders.
"Most of us feel like we've been kicked in the guts. Our advice has been ignored and I can see how this is effectively going to put this industry under extreme pressure," he said.
"We support all the rules relating to tougher penalties but this size limit increase of 10 mm basically means that we're going to not be able to harvest crabs in the Gulf because a large proportion of the crabs there are always a smaller crab.

Farmers sign up to save rare cocky
Farmers are signing up in droves for a project which offers them cash for preserving the habitat of the Commonwealth Games mascot.
The Federal Government will spend more than $1 million to try to save the last 1,000 red tailed black cockatoos, found in Victoria and South Australia.
Cockies have been seen on the farm of Richard Hobbs at Clear Lake, who says protecting trees serves a dual purpose.
"We do value the trees, we think that we can crop and have trees," he said.
"We think it increases production - protection for the livestock and probably for crops too.

Rural jobs last resort for migrants: agent
There are claims today the growing social divide between city and country is making it hard to recommend rural areas to migrants.
Attracting migrants to regional areas has been touted as a solution to the skills shortage but migration agent Michael Walker says jobs in rural areas are often the last resort for his clients.
Mr Walker from Absolute Immigration Services says there is often a lack of opportunities, infrastructure and support in country areas.
"The infrastructure in many regional areas is not sufficient enough to sustain an influx of migration," he said.
"We already know that many young people who have grown up in regional areas are coming into the cities seeking employment.

Fears compo payments may restrict farmers' borrowing
Farmers who receive government-funded compensation payments are being warned they could have less leverage to borrow money from banks.
The issue has been highlighted in New South Wales, where compensation paid to ground water irrigators will be taxed as income.
Bruce Brown from Namoi Catchment Management says under the tax ruling, farmers who receive compensation for the loss of any property will see their asset base reduced.
"Banks would be seeing a loss of their loan security ratios which would obviously impact on the amounts of money they are prepared to lend because they will do their credit risk ratings etc on that," he said.

Research focuses on merino meat breeding
The merino industry is taking a stand against competition from meat sheep breeds.
While there has been plenty of study into merino wool, less is known about the sheep itself.
A five year project has been researching fertility, worm resistance, muscle and fat depth in more than 10,000 stud sheep.
South Australian breeder Robin Schwartz says the industry's future lies in being able to compete by offering good wool and meat characteristics.
"While wool prices are up and down, and more down than up at the moment, everyone is keen to kick some goals with the meat breeding side of the operations," he said.

Emerging market may help grape growers
An emerging grape seed oil market could help deal with the nation's oversupply of wine grapes
The seeds come from a by-product of wine production and the oil is used for eating and cooking, as well as pharmaceuticals and cosmetics.
Rocco Rombola has established a grape seed oil extraction plant at Loxton in South Australia's Riverland and says while it is a relatively new product in Australia, it has been used in Europe for years.

AWB accused of reneging on wheat commitment
Grain traders are accusing AWB of reneging on a public commitment to relax the company's power of veto over wheat exports.
They say applications for hundreds of thousands of tonnes of wheat, including one from the consortium Wheat Australia, are held up at the Wheat Export Authority (WEA).
It is nearly a month since Trade Minister Mark Vaile told grain growers that AWB would relax its veto power to allow other companies to export to Iraq.
But applications to export more than half a million tonnes of wheat have been before the WEA for weeks, including a Wheat Australia bid to sell 350,000 tonnes to Iraq.
Under current legislation, AWB must give written authority to the WEA before any export applications can be processed.
"The authority must not give a bulk export consent without the prior approval in writing of AWB. I guess they're still waiting for that," Alick Osborne from the Grain Exporters Association said.
Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran is confident AWB will stand by its word.
"AWB has committed to the Government and to wheat growers to waive its veto power, they will honour that commitment," he said.

Regional workers first to feel impact of IR changes: unions
Unions say regional Australia will be the first to feel the effects of the Federal Government's new industrial relations laws.
The changes come into force today, meaning employers have more power when negotiating contracts with workers.
Dr Chris Briggs from the Workplace Research Centre at Sydney University believes regional workers will see major changes.
"These types of laws were trialled in Victoria in the mid-90s under the Kennett government and what it found is that ... things didn't change all that much in the middle of the capital cities but where they changed were in regional areas where you had three times as many low paid jobs, particularly in jobs like retail, construction and hospitality, so it is likely that regional areas will feel the effects of this," he said.
But farmers and other regional businesses say the changes will lead to more jobs in regional Australia and greater flexibility for workers and employers.
Only farms that are incorporated or in Victoria will be able to negotiate under the new laws but the National Farmers Federation (NFF) says it will be encouraging farmers to incorporate so they can access the changes.
The NFF's Denita Wawn says over time the new laws will lead to better relations between employers and employees.

Farmers expecting conditions to worsen
Confidence in rural Australia remains weak, with more farmers expecting conditions to worsen over the next 12 months.
The latest quarterly rural confidence survey from Rabobank has found only a quarter of primary producers expect the agricultural economy to improve.
Rabobank's Neil Dobbin says farmers are particularly cautious in the lead-up to the winter cropping system, with many farmers in the eastern states waiting for rain.
"Across Australia the confidence was weaker. It's mainly what they're thinking about in the future, what they see commodity prices and input costs," he said.

Beef producer set for wagyu cattle production
Australia's biggest beef producer is set to take over the world's largest breeder of wagyu cattle.
Wagyu beef is renowned for its marbling and is highly prized in the Japanese market.
The Australian Agricultural Company has bought a bull herd belonging to Ballarat-based Westholme Wagyu, regard as the world's best outside Japan.
Managing director Don Mackay says the company hopes to buy Westholme's cows and calves, embryos and semen later this year.
"You produce a higher quality beef, you produce beef products that are worth considerably more value," he said.
"Clearly you've got a higher cost of production and the animals that we feed in our feedlot today are generally on feed for about a year but those animals are worth a lot of money.
"As long as you get the right performance from the right genetics.

Tasmanian wine grapes in short supply
While the mainland deals with a massive oversupply of wine grapes, Tasmania does not have enough for this year's vintage,
The island state is short around 500 tonnes of grapes, mainly those used to make sparkling wines.
The shortage means growers are receiving a good price for premium fruit and winemaker Andrew Pirie says there are no plans to import more fruit.
"If you examine why Tasmania is now, let's say isolated and good position it's because we've stuck with a strong Tasmanian regional branding," he said.
"For 20 years now we've focused on 100 per cent Tasmanian content and that now sets us apart from the south-east Australian blend which is becoming the wine that's in oversupply, so regionality has been our saviour."
Meanwhile a new national task force will work to find niche global markets for Australian wine.
The 13 member "new directions" group will also try to build stronger ties between producers and retailers, exporters and governments.
It is part of a bid to reduce the wine surplus.
And in another development, one company is introducing tetra paks for wine, the same as those used for long-life milk and fruit juice.
Already used in Canada, a business in Victoria's Sunraysia district will become the first company in the southern hemisphere to install the technology.
Ken Henderson from Best Bottlers says the taste of the wine will not change.
"It's virtually unbreakable, it can go into places where glass is not normally allowed in such as sporting venues, beaches," he said.

Flooding hits northern WA town
A tropical low hovering over the east Kimberley has continued to dump huge falls of rain over the region.
Wyndham received 560 millimetres over the weekend, causing major flooding and forcing road closures.
Graeme Down from the Fire and Emergency Services Authority of Western Australia says flooding in the lower Ord River is reportedly the biggest ever seen.
"The local manager for SES here advised me that he pulled his pump up to one and a half metres above what he thought was the highest he had ever seen and his pump went under again," Mr Down said.
"So I think there's been a huge volume of water that the Water Corp was telling us, before the waters had really come down out of the diversion dam that they were letting 580 cubic metres per second."

Rain sets back fight against noxious weed
While pastoralists in Western Australia's Pilbara region are rapt with the wet start to the year, record rainfall has resulted in a growing problem with noxious weeds.
Mesquite is a weed with spiny thorns and covers 150,000 hectares of grazing land west of Karratha.
Linda Anderson from the Pilbara Mesquite Management Committee says the rain has put the fight against the weed back a number of years.
"It's now going to germinate a lot of the seed bank that we think that was there that we haven't seen germinate in probably the last six or seven years when we haven't had rain," she said.

Spiralling whitefly found in Darwin backyard
Efforts have begun to control a new pest species found in the Northern Territory.
Spiralling whitefly was previously restricted to Queensland but has now been discovered in a Darwin backyard.
The pest can reduce production in plants like the mango, papaya and guava but Stuart Smith from the Department of Primary Industries says it can be controlled using a natural parasite.
"This is actually an extremely effective parasite," he said.
"It is classical biocontrol in that the parasite really knocks the pest down by 80 to 90 or 95 per cent but there is just enough to survive to maintain the parasite as well as the pest populations.
"But almost always in very low populations and not enough to be damaging."

Farmers set to show off produce
Preparations are well under way for this year's Sydney Royal Easter Show.
And farmers on the state's far south cost are getting ready to show off their produce, including Noel Watson, from Bega.
He is picking giant pumpkins and says it takes more manpower than you might think.
"More than we got here. I'll be bringing the tractor down here directly to pick it up, I think that one up there is probably the biggest I have grown, it could be pulling 200 kilos," he said.

Chinese uranium deal could prompt new mining boom
Australia could be set for a new mining boom with China set to sign an agreement to explore for uranium.
China is also a step closer to buying more uranium from Australia, to feed its new breed of nuclear power plants.
Mining analyst Warren Edney, from ABN Amro, expects Chinese companies to seek joint ventures rather than stake their own claims.
"They will be able to contract sales to the Chinese nuclear power generators and potentially we may even see BHP's Olympic Dam selling to the Chinese," Mr Edney said.
"I don't think that we will see massive exports because there is not necessarily a lot of free uranium which is why the price has gone up for yellow cake.

Woodside to spend billion on Vincent oil field
Australia's largest oil company will spend a billion dollars developing the Vincent oil field, off the coast of Exmouth, in north-western Western Australia.
Vincent will produce about a fifth of Woodside Petroleum's annual oil production by the end of 2008.
Hartley's analyst Rob Brierley says Woodside has locked in oil production from Vincent for higher than the current price of crude oil.
"It's a decent oil field," he said.
"They've managed to hedge about 30 per cent of their production. Where they've got oil price locked in between $55 a barrel and $75 a barrel that's pretty healthy margin stuff."

Record floods hit gulf country
Graziers in Queensland's gulf country are still trying to assess damage caused by record floods.
Heavy rain from ex-tropical cyclone Larry has caused both the Leichhardt and Alexandra Rivers to burst their banks, covering up to 40 kilometres.
There have also been reports of sharks spotted near a homestead, 80 kilometres inland from the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Further south, Michael Crisp from Lorraine Station, says more than 250 millimetres of rain has flooded areas he never believed would go under.
"Part of our farm, our irrigated farm has been really heavily damaged," he said.
"There was up to 900 acres of corn sown and 60 or 70 acres of sorghum that had about three or four foot of water go over it and appears to be buggered altogether."
But in sharp contrast, cattle are perishing in Queensland's far south-west, because it has been so dry.

SA dams fill for first time in decade
There has been good rain across South Australia over the past few days, boosting soil moisture levels.
One farmer says his dams have filled for the first time in a decade, with more than a hundred millimetres of rain falling.
Julian Baillie near Tumby Bay on the Eyre Peninsula says it has come as a surprise.
"I sort of did a lap around earlier in the day and a lot of them which haven't had any water in them for the best part of 10 years or even more some of them," Mr Baillie said.

Blair attacks EU trade policies
British Prime Minister Tony Blair has used an address to the Australian Parliament to attack the European Union's protectionist trade policies on farm goods.
Mr Blair says despite some gains in trade reform, a tide of protectionist sentiment is still flowing around the world.
The PM has also singled out the closed trade policies of the United States and Japan, saying the future of all trade negotiations hinges on the current Doha round of talks.
"If we can't put a decent trade round in place, when it is so plain that our long-term national interest and the wider interest of the world demand it, this will be a failure with multiple consequences, all of them adverse," Mr Blair said.

AWB pool returns up
To the grains market and wheat exporter AWB has lifted its expected pool returns for the 2006-07 season by $5 a tonne.
It is also expecting an increase in returns for 2004-05 because of a lower Aussie dollar.
The National Party wants to set targets for ending the flow of urban waste water into the ocean and increasing the use of recycled water in both cities and rural areas.
The Nationals research arm, the Page Research Centre, will conduct a study into recycled water to see if reused water could help attract and keep industries to regional centres.
Chair of the study, Queensland Nationals president, Bruce Scott says there needs to be greater debate on community attitudes to recycled water.
"What I do know is that there are so many communities that are on water restrictions almost year round now and there are communities in regional areas that are unable to attract new industries to those towns because they don't have any water to offer those industries," Mr Scott said.

Mixed response to wool contract system
A new contract selling system for superfine wool has had a mixed response from producers at the first of a series of nationwide meetings.
Under the plan, specific fibres would be supplied to customers through direct marketing, rather than the auction system.
Frank O'Connor, from the Australian Super Fine Wool Growers Association, says he is not confident the plan will get the support or the half million dollars it needs to get off the ground.
"Not at all, but I think that's the challenge ahead of us," Mr O'Connor said.

Electronic nose could solve sheep industry woes
A small grey box could be the key to reducing fly strike, one of the sheep industry's biggest health problems.
The electronic nose is being trialed by the Sheep Cooperative Research Centre at Armidale, in New South Wales.
It detects the stench of blowfly maggots in sheep near a watering point and sends a signal back to the farm's computer.
Dr Ian Colditz says, if successful, the e-nose could help the industry save more than $160 million a year.
"The device works by having some electronic sensors that are picking up chemicals that are part of an odour and that creates an electrical signal that can be picked up by a computer and could be relayed to the farm office," Dr Colditz said.

Milk prices increase angers WA farmers
Western Australian dairy farmers are angry at milk price increases announced by dairy company Fonterra, because they say they are not enough.
Fonterra owns the state's biggest milk processor, Peter and Brownes (PB).
Farmers say the increase of 1.6 cents per litre, as well as an extra two cents a litre for production is too little, too late.
Northcliffe farmer Alan Walker says farmers should demand a fairer price.
"I would like PB suppliers to all to send a letter there, just to say how they've been treated," he said.
"The way to look at it is if only five people send a letter over there, then we may as well get back to work because nobody's worried.
"But if 105 people send a letter over there, I think the Fonterra board would have to look at that quite seriously and come back and renegotiate this situation."

Cow excema outbreak poses threat
There has been an outbreak of potentially deadly facial excema in several cow herds in eastern Victoria.
Sunburn on teats is the first sign of the disease, which is caused by fungal toxins in damp pastures.
Gippsland vet Jack Winterbottom says if left untreated there could be a major outbreak.
"We'd have dead cows, at the very least you'd have cows that would be very hard to manage in terms of being irritable perhaps not wanting to be milked, be very reluctant to have units put on teats," he said.

Pork given a health lift
Researchers in the United States have found a new way for humans to take omega 3 oils, by eating pork or bacon.
While vitamin-enriched plant-based foods have been around for years, the researchers have now bred pigs, which produce the fatty acids normally only found in fish.
Professor Randall Prather from the University of Missouri says he is confident the technology will not have the same problems as cloning procedures previously used in sheep.
"Well we used the cloning procedures so the procedures are the same, and yes sometimes you do get some animals that aren't perfectly normal," he said.
"What you saw with the sheep in the UK was the first generation, and when they had offspring the offspring were normal.

Sniffer dogs to hunt cane toads
Sniffer dogs trained to smell out cane toads will soon be introduced in north-west Australia.
Tenders have been called by Western Australia's Department of Conservation and Land Management for canine training.
The department is looking for a hardy dog to withstand the tropical conditions and regional manager Gae Mckay says it will be trialed in the scrub this dry season.
"Obviously it has to be a dog that's trainable and in particular with the cane toads we want to make it a field ready dog, so it's not just a matter of sitting sniffing luggage and so forth," she said.

Vaile confident of Iraq wheat deal
Trade Minister Mark Vaile says an important deal to sell wheat to Iraq could be completed as early as this week.
The Iraqi Grains Board told reporters overnight it had signed a contract to buy 500,000 tonnes of wheat at $US190 a tonne or around $US130 million in total.
But the consortium dealing with Iraq, Wheat Australia is not confirming details of the deal or that the Iraqi Grains Board has signed a contract.
Mr Vaile says conditions are still to be sorted through, but he believes the reported figures are close to the mark.
"I understand it is getting close, the negotiations are getting close to conclusion but there are still a number of issues left to be resolved," Mr Vaile said,
"I'm also aware that what is being negotiated is a contract for around 500,000 tonnes of Australian wheat but not being involved at the centre of negotiations I can't confirm yet that that has been concluded."
Grains market analyst Lloyd George says if the Iraq contract goes ahead, it will be a big increase on the tonnage originally proposed.
But he says the price reportedly agreed to by Iraq, casts some doubt over the deal.

WA prepares for cyclone Glenda
Western Australia's Pilbara region is bracing for severe winds and heavy rainfall as cyclone Glenda tracks down the coast.
The cyclone has been upgraded to category five and is north of Port Hedland, with warnings of wind gusts up to 200 kilometres an hour.
Weather forecaster Gavin Edmonds says by late tomorrow or Friday morning cyclone Glenda will be very close to the Pilbara coast.
"It is a very large system, one of the strongest cyclones we have seen off our Australian coast line," Mr Edmonds said.
"The estimated wind gust in near the centre are up to 300 kilometres an hour, exactly the same as Larry was prior to it approaching the coast line.

Gulf graziers appeal for assistance as floodwaters rise
Graziers in Queensland's north-western Gulf country want more state help for families affected by the worst flooding in 100 years.
Authorities fear the damage bill will run to millions of dollars after heavy rainfall in the wake of cylone Larry.
Bill Olive from Cliffdale Station says he had nearly 70 millimetres of water flow through his house and expects significant stock losses.
"I do hope that they do something to help a lot of people, especially people who are working in the area and a lot of the graziers," Mr Olive said.

CSIRO works with grain farmers on harvest predictions
The CSIRO hopes new research will give graingrowers an idea of what the season will be like six months in advance.
At the moment the Bureau of Meteorology can only give a three month outlook.
Peter McIntosh, from Marine and Atmospheric Research in Hobart, says they are a step closer to helping farmers make more accurate decisions in the lead up to harvest.
"What we'd really like to be able to do is to tell the farmer whether the climate conditions in the coming six months would be really good for growing or not," Mr McIntosh said.

DPI finds exotic tomato virus in SE Qld
Queensland officials have confirmed an outbreak of an exotic virus in tomato crops near Brisbane.
Yellow leaf curl virus has never before been found in Australia and has the potential to significantly cut production.
Chris Adriaansen, from the Department of Primary Industries, says up to 40 small farms could be affected, but says seedling nurseries that supply growers in other parts of the state are so far clear.
"Yellow leaf curl is quite a serious virus of tomatoes," Mr Adriaansen said.
"In other parts of the world where it has attacked before it's been responsible for very significant losses in some cases up to 100 per cent.

Resource industry struggles to find workers
Mining and resource companies are starting to face staff shortages as the jobs boom in rural Australia continues.
A new report says the demand for good staff is making it hard to find and retain skilled workers, and it's going to get worse.
Andrew Staite from Hudson Employment says the falling dollar and growth in China will continue to cause problems.
"It is good news but is also starting to now present lots of organisations with difficulties because the difficulty in attracting skilled workers, into certainly Western Australia and Queensland, is getting greater every day.

Mining boom apparent at NT conference
The boom in the resources sector has been reflected in a record turn-out at this year's Northern Territory mining conference.
About 200 executives from around Australia have been learning more about potential mineral and metal discoveries in the Territory.
And most agree that companies are stepping up exploration as they look to cash in on strong commodity prices.
"I'm Peter Robinson I'm a consultant I'm up here for URANEX, Uranium Exploration Group, people are starting to focus here a lot and the more they focus the more they find and the more they find the more they focus."
"John Thevissen from Mincor Resources, because we're based in Western Australia this is our first time in the Northern Territory, we've applied for ground in the Northern Territory to look for base metals copper, lead, zinc and silver."

Push for licence review after trawling company goes under
Darwin's prawn trawling fleet has been cut almost in half with the demise of a major company.
Austfish has been placed in receivership with higher operating costs, cheaper imports and season limits believed to be responsible.
It is expected most of the company's 12 boats will be withdrawn from the fleet along with those of a smaller operator, who has voluntarily entered administration.
David Carter of Newfishing Australia is calling on the Commonwealth Government to urgently buy back licences.
"We expect in the next couple of weeks, the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry will invite all operators in the northern prawn fishery to tender their right, that will be in the form of a buy back," Mr Carter said.

Residue concerns open up Japanese hay market
Concern over residues found in hay exported from the United States to Japan is opening up new markets for Australian farmers.
The hay exporting company Johnson Asahi wants more farmers to grow oaten hay for the Japanese market, to capitalise on Australia's clean, green image.
Spokesman Anthony Chapman says it is not yet clear what the residues found in the US hay were.

Flooded market makes life tough for citrus growers
Citrus growers say their outlook is going from bad to worse.
Growers says a large crop, a flood of cheap imported juice concentrate and shrinking export markets are preventing many from selling their fruit.
The summer crop is being dumped in southern New South Wales, with growers angry at an offer of $80 a tonne for their fruit.
Frank Battistel from Riverina Citrus says he is not confident about the future.
"I know quite a few properties that have turned off water to their trees, they just can't continue to lose profit every year like that and they need to make a decision to either keep going and lose money or just get out of the industry."
But citrus growers in the west believe China could be their salvation.
It has taken more than five years for the Chinese to approve Australian fruit imports, which will largely come from the eastern states.
WA orchardist Mark Scott says that will mean less fruit sent west.
"We compete against imports from those states here in WA every day and so that the taking fruit out from their markets will mean less competition here in WA," Mr Scott said.

European winter hits global poppy industry
The global poppy crop has shrunk, with the estimated surplus also half the size of this time last year.
An exceptionally cold European winter and smaller plantings have caused the drop.
Lindley Chopping, from the Tasmanian Poppy Growers Association, says the worldwide glut had previously equalled two and a half year's supply of opiates.
"It's down to about one and half years supply," she said.

Tough times for SA potato farmers
South Australian potato growers are facing a poor harvest, with below average yields and low prices.
Growers say there's been an oversupply of potatoes for the past three season, and there's no relief in sight.
Greg Rodert who grows potatoes for the fresh market in Bordertown, says the below cost of production prices have forced many growers to cut back on the amount they produce.
'We're down in our plantings generally through lack of finance I suppose you might say," Mr Rodert said.

Jail threat for farmers employing illegal workers
Farmers and business operators who knowingly or recklessly employ illegal workers could go to jail under new laws announced by the Federal Government.
Immigration Minister Amanda Vanstone says there are around 46,000 overstayers in Australia, many working illegally to support their stay.
But Senator Vanstone says only employers and labour suppliers who deliberately assist or exploit illegal workers need to fear the laws.
Farmers have been the target of Immigration Department raids, especially fruit and vegetable growers who often struggle to find enough seasonal labour to pick crops.
The National Farmers Federation (NFF) says very few growers deliberately employ illegal workers.
And the NFF's Denita Wawn says there is protection in the laws for farmers who unwittingly employ illegals.

Fuel prices set to rise
Fuel prices are set to hit last year's record highs.
The price of both petrol and diesel is up in many parts of the country, blamed on the rising price of crude oil and the falling value of the dollar.
But Geoff Trotter from Fuel Track says traditionally fuel prices are at their highest at Easter and it is not good news this year.

Glenda heads toward Pilbara coast
Western Australian mining communities are on red alert as tropical cyclone Glenda approaches the Pilbara coast.
The industry has come to a standstill as it prepares for gale force winds and possible flooding from the category 4 cyclone.
Iron ore boats which were loading in the Dampier Port have been sent out to sea to try to avoid the path of the cyclone.
Harbour master Vic Justice says inside the port all the berths are empty and equipment has been tied down.
"The vessels at the various terminals as they completed loading they sailed to put out to sea and get sufficient sea room to ride out the cyclone," he said.

Cyclone recovery expected to take months
In far north Queensland and the Gulf country, communities are still trying to come to terms with the impact of cyclone Larry.
The community has donated $10 million to help but the recovery will take months, if not years.
Cyclone Larry is said to have cost 4,000 jobs, many of them on farms and there is a concern young people will exodus the region in search of work.
AgForce has expressed concerns that flood affected graziers may not be able to access assistance if it is means-tested because of the increase in property valuations.
The Bundaberg Sugar Company will not open its Mourilyan mill south of Innisfail for this year's cane crush, saying Larry has drastically reduced the harvest forecasts.
Cane will be diverted to other mills and farmers calling for assistance to remove trees and debris from the orchard have been told by cyclone recovery task force coordinator General Peter Cosgrove that the Army will help if they put up a strong enough case.
"I would like those people who are suffering those frustrations and wonder if they can get urgent assistance to refer it to the incident management centre in Innisfail," he said.
Meanwhile cyclone Larry is being blamed for a temporary shortage of fish in Victorian markets.
Peter Clarke from the Lakes Entrance Fishermen's Co-op says there has been rough weather since the cyclone hit Queensland last week.
Mr Clarke says with winds of more than 30 knots, smaller trawlers are staying in port more days a week than usual.

More professionals choosing part-time work in regional areas
New figures show balancing work and family is beginning to bite in rural professions already short of staff.
Research by the Australian Rural and Remote Workforce Agencies shows doctors, vets and teachers are increasingly choosing to work part-time.
Almost 40 per cent of country GPs work half a full-time shift.
But spokeswoman Martina Stanley says it can be a positive in attracting professionals to country areas.
"We're trying to achieve a system whereby we can support them so that they don't have to work the way that doctors did once upon a time," she said.
"The impact is felt more significantly in rural areas because traditionally rural doctors have worked longer hours on average than metropolitan doctors.
The Nationals want more safeguards to protect the diversity of regional news services before they will support media ownership changes.
The Federal Government wants to let media owners operate across radio, television and print, leading to fears of consolidation in rural areas.
But Nationals leader Mark Vaile says businesses must be protected from increased advertising costs, while community groups must have access to locally-based newsrooms.

McCain, potato growers settle price row
After nine months, Victorian potato growers have finally reached a price agreement with food processor McCain.
The company had been offering lower prices, which farmers said would make the industry unviable.
The McCain Growers Group says neither farmers nor the company are happy with the deal because there was compromise on both sides.
Chief executive Tony Pitt says growers have accepted $2.75 a tonne less than last year's price.
"There is a price now that will operate now for 2006 deliveries and also for 2007 and that price will be $227.25," he said.

Potato growers to maintain crop production
Tasmanian potato growers have welcomed new crop contracts from the processor, Simplot and now expect to maintain crop production at recent levels.
Last year Simplot told growers there would be price and volume cuts when McDonald's awarded a major french fry contract to New Zealand growers.
But Dennis Leonard from the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association says the situation has improved.
"Simplot got on their front foot and went out and chased down some new markets, which has been of benefit to a lot of growers in the State," he said.

Highway upgrade to improve flood prone section
The Federal Government has announced plans to improve road train access between central Australia and Queensland.
A $2 million upgrade will improve a flood prone section of the Plenty Highway, which links Alice Springs to cattle markets in the east.
But there are no plans to seal the road, which some road trains refuse to use.
Central Australian pastoralist Dick Cadzow says it is a good start but more is needed.
"Any improvement that they do to that road is a big help," he said.
"I can give you an instance here, six decks coming down the other day, we could not get over 30 kilometres an hour.

Levy to pay for rail upgrade angers grain growers
Farmers on South Australia's Eyre Peninsula are angry at a proposed grain levy to pay for a regional rail upgrade.
Up to $40 million will be spent upgrading road and rail, and farmers are being asked to contribute $2 million.
The Regional Development Board says dollar-for-dollar federal funding could be jeopardised if farmers do not support the 50 cent per tonne levy.
While there has been some support, most attending a grain grower forum at Cummins objected to it.
"I just think we're being conned," one farmer said.
"The buck stops at the farmer's gate and we're regarded as a bit of a cash cow.
"Everytime they want money they seem to think 'oh well we'll just whack a levy on for a while'."

Salinity threatening Barossa Valley: expert
An Adelaide professor says one of Australia's most renowned grape growing regions could be infested with salt in 10 years.
A professor in meteorology at Flinders University, Peter Schwedtferger, says grape growers need to minimise irrigation in the Barossa Valley.
He says saline water is being piped from local reservoirs, which is already causing problems.
"If the Barossa is over irrigated with this relatively saline water that's currently being used, the Barossa's life is going to be limited," he said.
"Once the really serious saline infestation occurs it's going to be too late."
But one of the Barossa's biggest grape growers, Ed Schild, says salinity is not a problem and estimates only half a hectare is affected by salt.

Cattle station sells for nearly $40m
A Kimberley cattle station has sold in what is believed to be one of the region's biggest sales.
A WA agricultural company has handed over almost $40 million for the historic Moola Bulla Station, its 35,000 head of cattle and 300 working horses.

Radical changes to wheat export system may cost millions
The Grains Council says making radical changes to the wheat export system before this season's harvest could cost the industry half a billion dollars.
Ahead of releasing a blueprint on the future of the single desk next week, the Grains Council says it will be calling for AWB to retain control of selling this season's harvest.
The council's David Ginns says despite the obvious concerns over AWB, it is still the best company to manage Australia's wheat exports in the near term.
"It's not just something you can say 'ok let's make a change tomorrow'," he said.
The council says AWB and other traders have invested millions of dollars based on AWB's control of the pool and any sudden change will hurt growers.
Mr Ginns has also angrily rejected a report suggesting growers want this year's harvest underwritten to the tune of a billion dollars by the Federal Government.

US reaches agreement with Japan to reopen beef market
US Department of Agriculture (USDA) officials says they have reached an agreement with Japan on steps to reopen that country's beef market.
Imports of US beef were suspended in January after a shipment of veal was found to include bone material prohibited by the Japanese.
USDA acting under-secretary Chuck Lambert told a Senate panel his team has answered Tokyo's remaining questions about January's foul-up at a New York veal plant and set in motion steps to resume beef trade, starting with a plant safety checklist.
"Once that takes place, we will have people in the plants and do those verification audits, just as fast as we can," he said.
"That probably will take in the neighbourhood of a week to 10 days, to two weeks.
"And then, the next challenge will be to get the auditings from Japan in, to do the verification visits."
And Mr Lambert says Tokyo has agreed to do outreach with Japanese consumers to outline the changes and reassure them of the safety of US beef - a significant turnaround if true.
Meanwhile beef from the United States is being sold at a 20 per cent discount into Australia's fourth biggest market, Taiwan.
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) says beef sales from Australia are not being affected and does not think the Americans are likely to try the same tactic in the much bigger Japanese market.
Tim Kelf from MLA says food quality and safety are likely to be the issues in Japan, not the price.
"The retailers are being very cautious about just jumping back into American product, the Japanese are not going to rush back to American product," he said.
"I wouldn't necessarily have agreed with that 12 months ago but I think that this time the Japanese consumer from my previous experience many years ago are fairly twitchy.

Govt clears way for Snowy Hydro sale
There has been heated debate in Federal Parliament, with the Government clearing the way to sell its 13 per cent share of the Snowy Hydro Electricity Scheme.
The Government and Opposition support the sale but the Nationals' Kay Hull and independents oppose it, saying privatisation could harm irrigator water entitlements and environmental flows.
Member for New England Tony Windsor says the Government has rushed through the sale motion without enough public consultation.
"There are so many unknowns in terms of the Murray Darling system that this is not the time to place into private hands an instrumentality that can have an impact on environmental and water entitlement needs of that system," he said.

Pilbara escapes major cyclone damage
Western Australia's Pilbara region has escaped major damage from cyclone Glenda despite the category 4 storm reaching speeds of 180 kilometres an hour.
The cyclone crossed the coast last night at Mardie Station, a cattle property 100 kilometres west of Karratha.
After enduring five hours of deafening winds, Mardie pastoralist Richard Climas now has a big clean job up on his hands.
"There's a bit of carnage around, we've got doors off sheds. A big shed door, they're hangar doors so they're pretty big doors and one of them come loose and we happened to be looking out the window and see it go flying past," he said.
"And got a few of the solar panels have blown over actually bent the 50 millimetres square steel, just bent it like toothpicks, so got a bit of work this morning."
Big rainfall from cyclone Glenda is expected to increase the threat of locust plagues in WA.
Entomologist Kevin Waldon says there are already a large number of locusts across the State's agricultural regions.
He is warning farmers to be vigilant because there is a risk that locusts will survive until the beginning of seeding.
"Given the green conditions we've got now, I expect the locusts will survive at least five to six weeks," he said.

Brisbane company to take majority stake in US ethanol producer
A Brisbane-based company will take up a 60 per cent stake in the United States' biggest farmer-owned ethanol producer.
Farmer members of Midwest Grain Processors in Iowa voted to support Global Ethanol's bid this morning.
David Nelson from Midwest Grain Processors says the deal will lead to a massive expansion of ethanol production both in the US and Australia.

More incentives needed to biofuel take-up
A sustainable energy expert says there are not enough incentives for country people to start using biofuels.
While 75 per cent of the world's renewable energy projects are based in the country, Matthew Rosser from WA's Sustainable Energy Association says it is cheaper for farmers to buy diesel under the current tax system.
He says the demand for biofuels will come from city consumers, who do not get fuel exemptions.
"For the agriculture sector, the incentive to move towards biofuels isn't as strong as what it would be for consumers within the metropolitan areas," he said.

Mixed reaction to airport ID cards
Security at regional airports is being stepped up from today with the introduction of compulsory identification cards for all staff.
All airport workers from pilots to cleaners will need clearance from ASIO, the Department of Immigration and the Federal Police.
But not everyone is happy.
Sonja Mitchell from aviation company Sling Air, in the far north of Western Australia, says the cards are a huge cost and it is difficult to justify the security benefits,
"All it means really is extra cost, It has no obvious safety or security benefit at all, especially in a town like Kununurra," she said.
"We don't have fencing around the airport perimeter, there is fencing up to a point where the jets in at the airport terminal, the rest is just the same as usual. It's only an added cost of $180 per staff member that needs to go airside."

Fruit exports to Taiwan set to resume
The Federal Government says table grape and citrus exports to Taiwan are set to resume.
The trade was halted at the start of the year because of Taiwanese concerns about Queensland fruit fly.

Growers reject latest NZ apple bid
Apple and pear growers have rejected New Zealand's latest bid to export apples to Australia.
Submissions closed yesterday on a new draft risk import analysis which would allow New Zealand apples into the country.
But growers like Tom Quirke from Loxton, in South Australia, say the risk of the disease fireblight is still too great.
"The last thing we need is to have something further to cause an industry to become unviable and that's exactly what would happen if New Zealand apples arrived in Australia," he said.
"It's not if we got fire blight but when we get fire blight. It's too much of a risk. We could never support that."

Wool market falls
The wool market has again fallen away due to the quality of wool on offer at sales this week.
The eastern market indicator dropped six cents, to finish at 738 cents a kilogram clean.

New mulesing alternative may help make lambs fatter
Australian Wool Innovation says alternative mulesing methods are helping lambs to gain weight faster.
Mulesing involves removing a fold of skin around the breach area, and has been targetted by animal welfare groups as inhumane.
AWI has been trialling a clip and an injection system, which removes wool from the breach and tails of lambs.
Spokesman Scott Williams says lambs with the clips grew to 26 kilos, while the mulesed lambs grew to 24 kilos, but he is warning growers about getting too excited.
"The growers we're working with recognise that we're in the research and development phase," he said.

Shearing course targets keen teens
Teenagers in Victoria are being given a taste of life in the shearing shed, as the industry tries to save thousands of dollars on wasted training.
Woolgrower levies have funded the course, which is designed to attract the best novice shearers, and stop trainees dropping out once they discover they do not like the work.

Town to feel impact of workers' sacking, says union
The sacking of 29 workers at an abattoir at Cowra in central western New South Wales is fuelling debate over the Federal Government's new workplace relations laws.
Unions say the workers have been told they can apply for 20 new positions, with a $200 a week pay cut.
Charlie Donzow from the Meat Industry Employees Union says the whole town will feel the impact.
"By reducing workers' income, it means that it reduces the overall expenditure within the immediate town and area so that does have a flow-on effect to the overall town economy," he said.
"Now the new Workchoices legislation unfortunately allows companies to take this position because they can simply claim it's because of operational reasons."

Govt urged to take its time negotiating China FTA
Farmers are warning the Federal Government to take its time negotiating a free trade deal with China after a push by Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao to accelerate talks.
China's demand for Australian farm produce has tripled in the past decade and is now worth more than $3 billion to local farmers.
Premier Wen is in Canberra to among other things push the free trade negotiations forward.
But Ian James from vegetable grower group Ausveg is warning slow and steady could be better approach.
"Our concerns would be that in the past that basically Australian agriculture probably hasn't done as well as what most people would have expected," he said.
National Farmers Federation president Peter Corish says farmers want a deal soon but not at the expense of a complete agreement which includes farm goods.
"That of course is a good thing for Australian agriculture as long as we get a comprehensive deal that includes agriculture at the end of the day," he said.
Trade Minister Mark Vaile says he will not be rushed and will only settle for a comprehensive deal that includes agriculture.
Meanwhile the uranium industry says it welcomes a move to export yellowcake to China but will not support price regulation.
Premier Wen has floated the idea of price fixing to stop the cost of uranium rising too high like other raw materials including coal and iron ore.
But Ian Hore-Lacy from the Uranium Information Centre says resource deals are commercial contracts, driven by market forces.

Plantation trees may contribute to greenhouse gas levels
New research suggests plantation trees could actually contribute to greenhouse gas levels rather than lower them.
A report in the international science journal Nature says the trees emit methane.
It was previously thought methane emissions from plants came from areas where oxygen was limited, like rice paddies.
Research scientist Philip Polglase says while the finding was totally unexpected, it is not necessarily alarming.
"What we in Ensis have done recently is compare expected rates of methane release from tree plantations with the rates of carbon uptakes," he said.
"The amount of methane released is only a very small amount or the carbon equivalent taken up. We think it's about less than 5 per cent.

Judges notice impact of climate change on wine quality
The quality of wines world-wide is being affected by climate change and critics and judges are already noticing the changes.
That is the consensus from a world conference on climate change and wine in Europe.
An Australian speaker at the conference, Dr Richard Smart, says industry leaders are already planning for big shifts in varieties grown in established wine regions.

Better disease reporting systems urgently needed: academic
A leading health academic says humans are at a greater risk of contracting diseases like the plague, Ross River fever, SARS and HIV because health authorities are not properly tracking diseases carried by animals.
Professor Peter Curson says humans now often come into contact with wild animals and developments like housing estates on former farmland increase the risk of exposure to disease.
He says better reporting systems are urgently needed.
"One classic example of this is how we collect or survey information about infection in animals and how that is done independently from collecting material about disease in humans," he said.

Concerns mount over wool quality
Concerns are growing in the wool market over the amount of pool quality wool on offer.
Despite a weaker Australian dollar, the market has dropped significantly in recent weeks.
Mike Crooks from Elders says quality issues need to be addressed to lure buyers back.
"We've got a lot of tender wool and old wool coming onto the market as a percentage of the overall catalogue and countries, other than China, are really not in there going like we know they can be," he said.

Grain growers expected to approach plantings with 'caution'
High fuel and fertiliser costs, a low Australian dollar and global grain prices will affect plantings for this season's grains crops.
Forecasters say most farmers are expecting average seasonal conditions but there is still uncertainty about expected prices.
Plantings of wheat, barley and canola are all tipped to be similar to last season.
Ron Storey from Australian Wheat Forecasters thinks many growers will play it safe.
"I think a lot of farmers are still under financial pressure. Whilst in a yield sense last year didn't turn out too badly, across Australia, the prices of course were very, very low around harvest time so people are pretty nervous about that and they'll be looking for a recovery year this year and approaching it with quite a bit of caution I'd think," he said.
With average rain, Mr Storey's forecasting a national wheat crop of around 22 million tonnes for the 2006-07 season.
And there is some good news, a drop in forecast corn plantings in the US is expected to lead to improved wheat prices.
While less corn will be grown, there is expected to be high demand for the crop from the growing ethanol industry.

WA's north-west mops up after Glenda
Western Australia's north-west is mopping up after its fourth cyclone of the year which has spared the region from major damage or flooding.
When category 4 cyclone Glenda crossed the coast late last week it dumped hundreds of millimetres of rain, sparking fears of rising rivers and flooding, however most areas have escaped unscathed.
Carnarvon banana growers are thanking their lucky stars Glenda petered out before it hit the region, sparing the region's banana crops.
Grower Bruce Munro says it was a nervous wait on Thursday evening.
"We did really well. We copped a little bit of wind, there's an odd bunch down but we survived very well," he said.
Meanwhile the region's mining industry is also mopping up.

Dept to lease out ag research stations
In a major shake-up, Western Australia's Department of Agriculture is planning to lease out its 13 agricultural research stations to farmers.
Spokesman Rob Delane says the stations are too small and not productive enough to allow leading research work.
"A small department of agriculture research station with a couple of hundred hectares of bulk crop is not the place to demonstrate leading cropping techniques when our neighbours have got properties five and 10 times our size," he said.

'Self-promotion' needed in agriculture industry
Agriculture's future leaders say the industry has to do more to promote itself.
More than 30 young people have taken part in a Young Rural Leaders' Course in Canberra and believe the farm sector is marred by the image of drought-stricken farmers.
They also believe urban consumers do not understand what role farmers plan in producing their food.
Victorian winemaker and lamb producer BeN Clifton says agriculture needs to get proactive.
"Self-promotion is the best way to do it," he said.
"We've got a good product and I know in my region, especially in north-east Victoria, we are absolutely spoilt almost every season even with the wine in the area.
"There's not a single wine style in Australia that can be made that can't be made in north-east Victoria but we have to tell people that.

Age no barrier to competitive wood chopping
Competitive wood chopping might be considered a young bloke's game but an 84-year-old Tasmanian has shown age is no barrier.
Retired tree feller and former wood chop title holder Henry Munday was a crowd favourite at the Hamilton Show north of Hobart at the weekend.
While he took almost five minutes longer than his competitors in the wood chop, he got there in the end, with the help of an old mate.
"That's an old plum axe, one of the old American plums, it's like me, it's pretty old," he said.
"But it's not a big axe, I don't use real big axes.
"I'm not strong enough now like those other big fellas out there to use big heavy axes so I use the lighter one.

Central Australian cattle head west
Central Australia's beef producers are reaping the benefits of recent heavy rainfalls in Western Australia.
Despite the rising freight costs, WA pastoralists are buying cattle from the centre as they look to cash in on the best season in years.

New crop varieties double yields in East Timor
New crop varieties being trialled in East Timor have doubled yields.
Maize is the stable crop along the rugged country on the doorstep of Darwin and harvest is now under way.
In the steep uplands of Liquica overlooking the capital of Dili, some maize farmers have recorded yields of up to three tonnes per hectare.
That is twice the average and is the result of five years of research and collaboration under the Seeds of Life project, which includes rice, casava, sweet potatoes and peanuts.
This Australian-funded initiative aims to improve nutrition and wellbeing amongst the subsistance-farming families of this newly-independent nation.

Wine grapes oversupply to impact on company profits
The global oversupply of wine grapes is starting to hurt the industry's big companies.
The world's largest wine business, Constellation, is tipped to announce a lower than expected profit to the New York Stock Exchange later this week.
US wine industry forecaster John Fredrickson says the global market is in a down phase, particularly for countries producing cheap bulk wine.
But he says in Australia, the answer is not in growing fewer grapes.
"You start to talk about pulling grapes, well that is really drastic, that means you have some other alternative and I don't think it is going to be any huge percentage of vineyards that run into that kind of extreme difficulty," he said.
Meanwhile a new research program for the wine industry will develop new export markets and create wine to suit specific tastes.
The Grape and Wine Research Development Corporation is using federal funds to investigate the wine tastes of consumers in countries like China, India, Eastern Europe and South America.
Professor of wine marketing at the University of South Australia, Larry Lockshin, says packaging, labelling, pricing and wine styles will also be considered.
"We're not going to come up with an answer that says, 'this is the wine for China'," he said.
"We're going to come out with the same thing scientists have come out with.
"This is, these are yeasts and these are the flavours they produce, these are pruning and canopy training techniques, this is what they do to your tannin levels.
"We're going to develop a method. Companies will then be able to decide whether they want to use it to develop wines for their own brands that suit different markets."
And the Victorian Farmers Federation wants better regulation of tax incentive schemes to stop oversupply problems.
President Simon Ramsay says the schemes have contributed to over-investment in vineyards, leading to an oversupply of wine grapes.
He says in south-west Victoria tax incentives for timber plantation investors seem to have affected normal competition for land.
"What we don't want to see is good traditional agricultural farming land being turned into plantations that have a sort-of unclear 12 year profit period where we are not allowing the food and fibre production to continue for generations," he said.

Farmers warned about loss of single desk for wheat exports
Farmers have been warned that grain prices could drop dramatically if AWB loses control of the single desk for wheat exports.
AWB International director Clinton Starr told a meeting of graingrowers at Murtoa in Victoria last night, that the company has secured a $13 per tonne premium each year through the single desk.
He says farmers should be very concerned about any plans to change the single desk after the Cole inquiry and AWB's experience in managing the system is as valuable to growers, as the single desk itself.
"I don't say that that is the only structure that can deliver that," he said.
"But what I would say is that if you change it you have to be very careful when you change or you effect change because in fact a lot of it is wrapped up in the intellectual and brain power of the people you employ to deliver the excess returns to you."
Meanwhile India is looking to import a further 1.5 million tonnes of wheat this year.

Tribunal rejects call for southern bluefin tuna ban
A conservation group's attempt to ban the export of southern bluefin tuna from Port Lincoln in South Australia has failed.
The Humane Society International (HSI) put a case to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for tuna exports to be banned because it believes the species is endangered.
But after three years of public consultation, the tribunal has upheld the Federal Government's decision to allow exports to continue.
Tuna Boat Owners Association president Brian Jeffriess says no-one else agreed that tuna was at risk.
"The court didn't think so, the Minister didn't think so, the public process didn't think so," he said.

US joins call for end to dairy subsidies
The US has joined Australia and other major dairy exporting countries to call for an end to subsidies, which they say are crippling legitimate trade.
The Global Dairy Alliance has written to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), also calling for greater market access by 2010.
Chairman of the Australian Dairy Industry Council, Allan Burgess, says having support from a heavily subsidised farming country like the US gives the campaign a stronger voice.
"And they still have certain levels of subsidy there and if the WTO changes take place they'll be reduced substantially," he said.

Goat abattoir lays off 140 in quarantine dispute
Australia's largest goat abattoir in western Queensland has temporarily closed to address animal welfare concerns.
In November, the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) required repairs to flooring in the abattoir's forcing yards, which were not carried out.
Managing director of Western Exporters Neil Duncan says he has been forced to lay off 140 workers, including 20 Vietnamese workers on special visas.
He says they will be left without an income and without access to Centrelink payments.
"They're not able to access anything, there again we're looking into that at this stage to see how we can help everybody out, they still will be employed by the company but how and where we're going to do it, I'm just not quite sure at this stage," he said.
"We will make every effort to get everybody back to work as soon as possible."

Sheep succumb to lupinosis outbreak
Two hundred sheep have died on South Australia's Eyre Peninsula, which is experiencing its worst outbreak of lupinosis in 20 years.
Twelve sheep producers have reported deaths, with come cattle suffering symptoms as well.

Central Australian beef producers benefit from WA rain
Central Australia's beef producers are reaping the benefits of recent heavy rainfalls in Western Australia.
Despite the rising freight costs, WA pastoralists are said to be buying cattle from the centre as they look to cash in on the best season in years.
Alice Springs livestock agent Herby Neville says it is the first time in four years that he has seen central Australian cattle heading west.
"They're experiencing a very, very good season over there and I think it's given the Pilbara and all that Western Australia, the Gascoyne and all that a very good drink," he said.
"And because of their flush of the season over there, they sometimes come over here and get a bit excited and buy a few cows and calves."
But agents in the west believe pastoralists are more likely to look to the Kimberley for cattle, because of the high cost of transport.
WA pastoral livestock manager Eric Broad says despite this year's high rainfall not everyone can afford to restock.
"It's an interesting question, there's a belt of country that's been hammered for about five years without any rain. And they're the ones that are really low down in numbers," he said.

Lessons learnt from mad cow epidemic
The discovery of mad cow disease has taught scientists how to better manage disease and improved how farmers and industry respond to new virus outbreaks.
It has 10 years since the link was discovered between mad cow disease in cattle and CJD in humans, with billions of dollars spent in control and research ever since.
Professor Colin Masters from the University of Melbourne says science has learnt many lessons from the mad cow epidemic.
"We've learnt a lot about risk minimisation and disease management," he said.
"If we've learnt anything at all we should have learnt that it's not a good thing to feed one species back to itself.
"In Europe it's been virtually outlawed, the situation in North America is different, they're watching very carefully what's happening in Europe and they're taking what appears to them to be appropriate measures at this time."

Dam to house turtle hatchery
The new Paradise Dam in south-east Queensland is soon to be the home of a world-first turtle hatchery.
Concerns were raised over the future of the endangered elseya turtle during construction of the dam on the Burnett River, south-west of Bundaberg.
But the new hatchery is designed to restore turtle numbers, with thousands of baby hatchlings expected to be released over the next five years.
Craig Thamm from the Burnett Dam Alliance says attacks on eggs and hatchlings by predators is the single biggest risk to the turtle's future.
"Particularly your feral predators such as foxes and pigs are [preying on] the eggs and you're getting very few, if any hatchlings back into the river," he said.

New plan calls for changes to single desk wheat exports
AWB would lose control of the single desk for wheat exports and its power to stop rival companies from exporting wheat, under a new plan released at Grains Week.
The report, prepared for the Grains Council, also calls for the Wheat Export Authority to be replaced with a grower-owned licensing and marketing body called Australian Wheat Associates.
Report author Colin Benjamin says the Cole inquiry shows the wheat export system is failing and growers risk losing control of their sector unless they accept major changes.
"To get into a global competitive game you've got to be playing in the league of your competitor and you've got to be strategic," he said.
"US Wheat Associates has been the long term major league champion fighting us which we have successfully beaten to a pulp over the decade, we now have to be seen as fighting on a level playing field, prior to the Doha Round because if we don't, we will have it imposed upon us."
The Grains Council says Australian Wheat Associates would be modelled on industry bodies for the meat and dairy sectors.
The Council says that would give AWB's current veto powers to growers, along with its responsibility to market and promote Australian wheat.
Chairman Murray Jones says if the changes are adopted, they will be implemented over three years.
"The last thing growers want is to have an abrupt change," he said.
"It just can not happen. It's just not going to work, it will affect our financial system, growers want security and planning, they want to know their finances are secure, they want to be assured they're going to get their payments, they want to have a transparent system they can see through. That's what they're asking for."
Meanwhile five US farm state senators have asked the Bush administration to investigate AWB payments to former Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein.
The group also wants AWB sanctioned if it is found to have violated US trade law or World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules.
The senators cite the findings of a UN audit of AWB, which found it paid some $220 million in alleged kickbacks to secure wheat contracts through the UN oil-for-food program.
Top Senate Agriculture Committee Democrat Tom Harkin's spokesman Dave Townsend says US farmers should not have to compete with foreign governments in trade.
"It's clear that there were gross violations of the UN oil-for-food program by the Australian Wheat Board and we feel that the US Government needs to make a determination whether the law was broken," he said.

Gold price increase may force jewellery manufacturing overseas
If you are in the market for a gold wedding band, you had better be prepared to pay more.
The price of June spot gold hit $US596 an ounce this week, putting enormous pressure on Australian jewellery makers.
John Howie, from the Australian Jewellers Association, says at current gold prices, manufacturers will be forced to up the price of jewellery and get their designs made overseas at a lower cost.
"Many Australian manufacturers have bitten the bullet and decided that really what they have to do is design here and use the quality we have in design and manufacture overseas," he said.
"It's the same as the footwear industry and the clothing industry, we just have to find other ways to do it."
Those high gold prices and advances in exploration technology are driving a new gold boom in Victoria.
Ballarat Goldfields has attracted $50 million in international investment to ramp up its production.
And while the Stawell gold mine was being wound down before it was taken over by Leviathan Resources, exploration manager John Dugdale says it is now expanding.
"The grade we try to keep up to the mill is five and six grams of gold to the tonne," he said.

Minister confident forest scheme will hold up to scrutiny
Federal Forestry Minister Eric Abetz is confident that Australia's Forest Standard will be upheld after a UK Government review.
The UK has placed a number of global forest certification schemes on probation while it reviews guarantees that the wood is sustainably and legally harvested.
