Peter Metcalf from the Department of Agriculture in Geraldton says it is time to pull up the seeders and start making a plan for the rest of this season.
"What tends to happen in this situation, which is a very unusual situation, most growers haven't previously been in this state, or these conditions previously, is that you start the program and you continue on," he said.

Violence hits E Timorese agriculture
East Timor's agriculture sector has been seriously affected by recent violence.
Fires, looting and mayhem in the capital Dili have destroyed eight years of research and documentation.
The price of fresh fruit and vegetables has also sky-rocketed.
Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Estanislau Da Silva, also fears coffee exports could be down by more than half.
"Now we are in the coffee season. It's the harvesting coffee season and this can have a tremendous impact on the livelihood and the people who depend on coffee," he said.

Ugly sheep could save wool industry
The search is on for the ugliest merino lambs, because they could save Australia's billion dollar wool industry.
Scientists from the South Australian Research and Development Institute (SARDI) and the University of Adelaide are looking for sheep with 'unusual wool', saying they hold the key to improving the genetic quality of merino wool.
Professor Phil Hynd from the University of Adelaide says lambs are usually culled because they have uneven wool, no crimp or bare patches.
He says studying the lambs will help them identify genes which affect wool production.
"We've already got about half a dozen animals that producers provided us with and man, they're the weirdest looking mob of sheep that you've ever seen in your life," he said.
"They're quite embarrassing really, even the sheep look embarrassed.

Indonesian fishermen to face court over alleged poaching
Twelve Indonesian fishermen will face court in Broome today, accused of poaching the sea cucumber delicacy, trepang.

Wine grower suggests pulling out cool climate vines
A respected South Australian vigneron has suggested pulling out grape vines in cool climate vineyards and putting the land to other use.
Coonawarra vigneron Ian Hollick says grape growers in cooler areas have been selling fruit at below the cost of production for the past three years, and there is no end in sight.
He does not think a proposal to compensate struggling grape growers is the way forward for the industry.
"I think its getting to the stage where we have to really bite the bullet and say that we need to remove so many thousands of hectares of cool climate grapes," he said.

Farmers still want access to Snowy Hydro documents
Farmers still want access to confidential information about water releases from Snowy Hydro, despite the collapse of plans to sell the electricity scheme.
Last week the New South Wales Government promised to let a delegation of farmers see documents relating to when water is released for irrigation.
Within 24 hours the Federal Government had withdrawn from the sale and it was abandoned.
Chairman of Southern Riverina Irrigators Ted Hatty says farmers will hold the State Government to its promise.

Doctors urge govt reform on rural medical services
Doctors say access to obstetric services in rural Australia is becoming critical and are calling for urgent government reform.
In allegations to be aired on ABC's Four Corners program tonight, doctors also claim that in some areas chemotherapy is being administered by people without formal qualifications.
They have also raised concerns about the loneliness of cancer patients forced to move to the city for treatment and the pressures that are forcing doctors to pack up and leave country towns.
Dr Ross Maxwell from the Rural Doctors Association says the problems are acute and most efforts to solve them are not making much difference.
"We have been reluctant to try and look at the economics around rural and remote practice and say well if the mining industry want to get professionals out into a remote community they make sure the conditions are right and attractive and can get them out there," he said.

Group seeks Govt help to reduce regional alcohol abuse
A national alcohol rehabilitation group is calling on the Federal Government to help stem the rise of alcohol abuse in regional Australia.
The Alcohol Education and Rehabilitation Foundation wants the Government to fund ongoing campaigns in rural areas because the level of injury and death from alcohol are much higher than in the cities.
Foundation chief executive Daryl Smeaton says it does not make sense that $2 billion has been spent on campaigns against illicit drugs, when only 5 per cent of the population use them.
He says for 85 per cent of people, alcohol is their drug of choice.
"We think of a drug problem, we think of cannabis and amphetamines because that's what the Federal Government keeps on telling us," he said.

Tas cow tests positive for hydatid tapeworm
A Tasmanian bred cow has tested positive for the hydatid tapeworm, the state's first case in a decade.
Tasmania embarked on a world leading hydatid eradication program 40 years ago and while hydatids have been discovered since, most have been traced to imported stock.
The state was declared provisionally-free of hydatid disease in 1996.
Chief vet Rod Andrewartha says the infected cow was part of a mixed line of cattle.
"Occasionally of course we will detect cysts and we can normally trace them back to sheep or cattle imported from the mainland, in this particular case we found it in an animal which was born and bred in Tasmania," he said.

Herpes-like virus threatens Vic abalone stocks
Efforts are under way to control a herpes-like virus which is killing abalone off the south-west Victorian coast.
The disease, ganglioneuritis, has been detected at four farms in south-west Victoria and at Flinders near Port Phillip Bay, with millions of dollars worth of stock having to be destroyed.
Fisheries Victoria says the disease has now escaped into the wild off Port Fairy.
Fisheries executive director Peter Appleford says although a similar disease devastated the abalone industry in Taiwan in 2003, he is hopeful control measures will stop a further spread here.
"What we're looking at is to put some controls in place along the coastline to limit the activity there," he said.

Dept, fishermen warn of imported prawn disease
Queensland's Department of Primary Industries has issued a warning against using imported raw prawns as bait, amid growing concerns they could carry disease.
Commercial fishermen want raw prawn imports stopped, claiming health inspections are too random.
They say up to 60 consignments have recently tested positive for white spot disease, the so-called foot and mouth of prawns.
Dr Ian Anderson, Queensland's principal veterinary pathologist on fish disease, agrees that imports do pose a threat.
"Prawns imported for human consumption can get purchased by recreational fishers and then used in their fishing activities and so that is a potential route of the spread of the virus from the imported product for human consumption through to our wild fishery stock," Dr Anderson said.

Lobster fishermen deny flooding market with snapper
South Australian lobster fishermen have rejected claims they are flooding the market with snapper and forcing down prices.
The SA Rock Lobster Advisory Council says fishermen are entitled to fish for snapper in the lobster off-season but have only caught 10 tonnes of the fish since July last year.
Spokesman Daryl Spencer has denied claims that two lobster boats unloaded 10 tonnes of snapper each at Port Lincoln at the weekend.
"There's one boat at this point in time since the end of our lobster season that's actually targeted snapper and in the 10 days that he has been fishing, he's taken in total 3.9 tonnes in total," he said.

Indonesian fishermen jailed for poaching sea cucumbers
Eleven Indonesian fishermen have been jailed after being caught poaching the sea cucumber, trepang, in Australian waters north of Broome in Western Australia last month.
They were on board two boats intercepted by the Navy at Scott Reef.
One of the captains has been sentenced to seven months jail, while the other captain and nine crew members have been fined.
They will spend between three and six months in jail because they could not pay the penalties.

March floods continue to impact on Ord River crop yields
Horticulturalists in the far north of Western Australia are still feeling the effects of floods which hit the Ord River region earlier this year.
In March, 300 millimetres of rain fell within 24 hours, making sown crops look like rice paddies.
Farmer David Menzell says he should now be in top-gear harvesting melons but has lost a whole month of production,

Historic SA outback hotels set for sale
An increasing number of hotels are up for sale in outback South Australia.
Among them are the Oodnadatta Roadhouse and the iconic Mungerannie Hotel on the Birdsville Track.
Publican Genevieve Hammond says after 11 years they have decided to move from the desert and head north to the tropics of north Queensland.
She says although fewer people want to move to remote areas, they have already got some interested buyers.

Students showcase environmentally sound projects
School students from New South Wales, Victoria and the ACT are in Canberra for a Youth River Health Conference.
The students have been working on environmental projects in the classroom and will give presentations in the form of music, dance, skits and board games.
Projects range from wildlife habitats to compost systems in playgrounds.

CSIRO report urges rural, urban water trading
A major scientific report says city water authorities should be allowed to buy water from farmers to sustain the growing urban population.
The CSIRO says without reform, water costs in metropolitan areas could rise more than 10 times over the next 25 years.
The report from the CSIRO and Monash University predicts Perth, Brisbane and Sydney will be the worst affected cities with the price of water jumping up to 10 times unless better reforms are put in place.
Three models have been tested and CSIRO says the most successful would be a combination of urban and rural water trading, alongside more efficient water use including desalination plants.
And while farmers could make a lot of money from water trading, the system would change the face of agriculture in Australia.
The CSIRO's Mike Young says urban/rural water trading is already working in South Australia and WA farmers are leading the way in saving water.
"Agriculture's a lot more skilful in improving water use efficiency and in 25 years time they've made a 50 per cent greater advance than urban Australia, so there's a challenge for urban Australia to catch up and show they're actually as smart as our farmers are," Mr Young said.
Bit some irrigators are worried about the social impact of water being diverted into the capital cities.
Although he believes some form of water trading with the cities is inevitable, Victorian dairy farmer Max Fehring says governments need to make sure urban residents share the cost of water infrastructure with rural communities.

Aust wheat price surges on back of international season
There is finally some good news for grain growers today, with international competition driving a big surge in wheat prices for the 2006-07 season.
AWB has released its first price estimates for wheat delivered to the national pool next harvest, with the benchmark Australian Premium White Wheat sitting at $222 a tonne, up $30 on last season.
National Pool manager David Johnson says while prices can still change, Australia is in a good position to capitalise on lower world production figures.
"We have a much stronger fundamental story around hard wheats in particular at the moment, with the US hard red winter crop experiencing some production difficulties," he said.

Expensive feed grain prices impact on graziers
Graziers buying grain to feed livestock this winter are feeling the pinch, with prices continuing to rise.
Dry conditions, higher petrol prices and strong global grain prices are all affecting the cost of feed grain.
Ron Storey from Australian Crop Forecasters says the success of grain-fed beef exports is also putting more demand on supply.
"Our demand here for grain domestically is being underpinned very, very solidly by a very strong feedlot cattle market, with grain-fed beef being in strong demand where BSE has given Australia pretty much by most of the market," he said.

Aust Farm Institute urges drought policy reform
The latest conclusions on drought policy reform, prepared for the Australian Farm Institute, say farmers should be encouraged to be better prepared for drought and governments need a major overhaul of how financial assistance is provided.
Several experts have prepared papers for the Institute and most agree that current drought policy is too focused on crisis management.
Financial adviser Rob Brown argues the policies penalise farmers who run their business in ways to cope with drought.
"If you have prepared, in fact if you've done the things that are the objectives of the drought policy, then you won't be eligible," he said.
And while there is a belief that government policy can actually worsen the wellbeing of farmers and waste resources, others say that fewer farmers are asking for help because of better farm management.
Linda Botterill from the University of NSW believes an income based loan scheme would be simpler and more effective at helping farmers through drought, and be less of a knee-jerk reaction from government.

Suspected illegal fishermen head to Broome for questioning
Six Indonesian fishermen suspected of poaching the sea cucumber trepang, have been taken to Broome for questioning by Australian Customs.
The Navy intercepted the fishermen at the weekend on a boat near Scotts Reef, 250 kilometres off the north-west coast of Western Australia.
Customs spokesman Peter Costantino claims they were caught with the sea cucumber on board.
"There was a small quantity of trepang found on board the vessel when the Navy boarded it and the fishermen were actively fishing at that time and diving on the reef," he said.
"The vessel started to be towed into Broome, but unfortunately broke up. The six fishermen were transported to the HMAS Larrakia and the vessel was destroyed at sea."

Wild rivers legislation will hamper development: groups
Graziers and Indigenous leaders on the Cape York Peninsula say future development of the region will be stifled by the Queensland Government's new wild rivers legislation.
The draft policy aims to protect 19 of the state's pristine river catchments, by introducing restrictions on agriculture, aquaculture and grazing.
Head of the Cape York Institute, Noel Pearson, says pastoralists and traditional landowners need to work together to fight the policy and environmentalists.
"We find ourselves in a position where the Greens no longer respect the fact people need economic development and the cattle industry in this region, and they've been winning," Mr Pearson said.

Groote Eylandt given Indigenous protection status
Australia's third largest island is being declared an Indigenous Protected Area (IPA) today.
Stakeholders have gathered to celebrate on Groote Eylandt in Northern Territory waters of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Under the agreement, the traditional owners of Groote Eylandt who speak Anindilyakwa will manage their land for conservation and heritage values.
Land Council Chairman Tony Wurramarrba says a local manganese mine is part of the plan.
"Virtually means that we can look after our land, more efficiently. We are in a very unique situation here on an island," he said.
"We don't have any feral animals that they do have on the mainland. One of the main changes that we see (is that ) we (will) have more control over our land.

McGuigan Simeon may extend fruit contract suspension
McGuigan Simeon Wines says contracts with grape growers in the Murray Valley and Riverland are likely to remain suspended until after next harvest.
Supply agreements involving 160 growers were placed on hold in December last year, due to a national oversupply.
A large amount of fruit was left to rot in vineyards or sold below the cost of production.
Mike Stone from Murray Valley Winegrowers says growers are devastated by the decision to extend the suspension and now have to consider how to manage their vineyards.
"Growers have been given plenty of notice unlike in 2005 when they were told in December two months before the 06 harvest that their fruit was to be suspended," he said.

Winemakers group downgrades vintage estimates
The Winemakers Federation has downgraded this season's vintage estimates by 79,000 tonnes.
Australia's total tonnage has fallen to 1.486 million tonnes, slightly down on last year.
Chief executive Stephen Strachan says early figures released last month did not take into account the amount of fruit that would not be harvested.
"The vintage came in at about 4 per cent down on last year's record level," he said.
"You'd probably recall that we've had two record season's in a row, given that there's been quite a significant surplus in place in the industry I think everyone was hopeful we'd have a vintage that was a bit lower this year and it has been.
That said though there's been a lot of fruit left on the vine or worked into the ground and had that all been processed we probably would have had another record this year."
Meanwhile the national wine grape grower body will put forward plans for a $60 million revival package at an industry summit in Melbourne on Friday.
Mark Mckenzie from Wine Grape Growers Australia says the proposal would take at least 600,000 tonnes of grapes out of production over the next two years, to ease the industry oversupply.
Mr McKenzie says the money could be generated by levies, and used to pay growers to put their vineyards into hibernation.
"Effectively it's 15,000 hectares at $2,000 so we're talking about $30 million a year each year for two years - a $60 million package," he said.

Barraba residents cautiously welcome mining company plans
Residents at Barraba, in the north-west of New South Wales, have cautiously welcomed a mining company's plans to extract minerals from the old Woodsreef asbestos mine.
The Sydney-based International Minerals Corporation has been granted an exploration licence worth hundreds of millions of dollars, which could involve a new magnesium metal and silica production plant at the mine.
The site near the town was abandoned in 1983.
Former mayor Shirley Close hopes the deal will go ahead, bringing up to 100 new jobs to the region.

Disease outbreak hits abalone industry
The abalone industry in south-west Victoria says it will take at least 12 months to recover from an outbreak of the herpes-like virus, ganglioneuritis.
Four abalone farms have been hit by the disease.
Tim Rudge from Allestree Coastal Seafarms at Portland says it appears the outbreak came from wild breeding stock, and is a severe setback.
"So we've had to lay people off and the other unfortunate thing is that in the south-west here we have developed a fantastic relationship here with the two local processors," he said.

Dairy operator seeks investor funds
The developers of a large, new dairy venture in South Australia are trying to attract cash from the managed investment sector.
Believed to be the first scheme of its kind in the state, the $15 million project at Tintinara, south of Adelaide, follows investor interest in vineyards, olive and blue gum plantations.
Developer Peter Ryan says high demand from milk processors and steady returns to farmers are making the dairy industry more attractive to investors.
"International indicators are good, here in Australia projections for demand continue to exceed projections for supply," he said.

Forecaster offers winter rain hope
With a lot of seed in the ground and many grain growers looking for vital follow-up rains, long-range weather forecasters are offering some hope this winter.
While the Bureau of Meteorology is predicting a drier than average season, others are tipping better conditions, particularly for the southern states.
Queensland-based Hayden Walker, who predicts the weather up to 18 months in advance, reckons this winter will be wetter than last year, although patchy.
'It's going to be a sort of topsy-turvy, or spasmodic, winter. Queensland will have light rains during June, with moderate falls in July, [and] probably get some reasonable falls on a finishing note in August," he said
"NSW will be looking at light to moderate rains in June and some moderate to reasonably good falls for the balance of winter.

SA growers to plant record crop
South Australian grain growers are set to plant a record area of crop after a good start to the season.
Authorities estimate plantings of around 3.83 million hectares, with 70 per cent already in the ground.
Primary Industries SA consultant Peter Fulwood says, with good conditions and yields, the crop could be worth up to $1.1 billion.
"We've had that earlier start, which has certainly encouraged farmers, and the price of wheat has certainly increased," he said.
"I think principally it's probably been the early start that has encouraged farmers to get in and put in an extra paddock here and there.

VFF backs change to single desk
The Victorian Farmers Federation (VFF) has joined the growing number of organisations calling for change to the single desk for wheat exports.
Under the VFF's plan, AWB would be forced to split to make the single desk more accountable.
AWB International would retain its monopoly on exporting wheat from the national pool, but the domestic arm, AWB Limited, would lose any commercial influence over exports.
Grains Group president Ian Hastings is looking for support from the peak Grains Council of Australia.
"The sort of things that are in our discussion paper, in our model, are the sorts of things that are absolutely dear to all growers around Australia," he said.

Qld leasehold agreement sealed
The Queensland Government and lobby group Agforce have after four years finally reached a new agreement for leasehold land, which is expected to provide more certainty for graziers.
Some conservation groups have argued that the maximum time for a lease should be 10 years.
Brett De Hayr from Agforce says the Government has agreed to 30, 40 and 50 year tenures.
"The frame work is basically 30 years for leases deemed to be in poor condition, 40 years for leases in good condition and the component that we think is actually most attractive in this is the ability for 50 year leases to be granted where people go over and above their duty of care," he said.

Fleece samples could face phase-out
Displaying fleece samples at wool auctions could be a thing of the past under moves to change the way the raw fibre is sold.
The Australian Wool Testing Authority is developing an objective measurement selling system, which will provide more detailed descriptions of wool instead.
The authority's Ian Ashburn says the trial is being driven by wool brokers, but there is some buyer support as well.
"The main feedback has been quite positive from the brokers. Like I said, we have been approached, because of our independence to undertake these activities, from brokers and some buyers in the past six to 12 months," he said.

Joint NT, WA pearling regulation agreed
The pearling industry will be regulated as one entity under a memorandum of understanding signed between the Northern Territory and Western Australia.
Most companies operate across both jurisdictions, stretching from the Territory's English Company Islands near Gove, to Exmouth in the Pilbara.
Captain Christopher Cleveland of Arafura Pearls says the agreement provides a platform to streamline regulations.
"There are some companies like ourselves, which don't have any involvement in Western Australia," he said.

Qld budget spends big on services
Health, education and infrastructure dominate the Queensland Budget.
The Treasurer says it is the biggest and highest ever level of spending for those key areas.
For the farm sector, the focus is on the 'Blueprint for the Bush', a 10-year program for the regions west of the Great Divide.
This year sees $150 million allocated for the plan.
The Primary Industry Minister says his department's budget has been boosted by $11 million and he will be employing an extra 100 officers by Christmas.
The Opposition disputes that that is the case and says there has in fact been a cut to the department of $28 million.

NSW Budget rural transport funding disappoints
Farmers in New South Wales say they are disappointed with a lack of money for rural rail and roads in the state Budget.
Posting a deficit of almost $700 million, the Government has increased spending for primary industries, natural resources and rural infrastructure.
Jock Laurie from the New South Wales Farmers Association says it was a wasted opportunity.

Mango growers warn of labour shortage
Mango growers in the Northern Territory are warning of another labour shortage this harvest.
Growers have told a Senate inquiry this week that guest workers from the Pacific islands should be allowed into Australia to help fill shortfalls.
Darwin grower Peter Delis says the inquiry told them no evidence of a labour shortage has been presented so far.
"The industry is a bit perplexed by this because there has been plenty of people that have made representation since 1996, where there is acknowledgment that there is a labour shortage issue in horticulture," he said.
"So the simple issue is absolutely, it's just where we can source the people.
"Last year was one of the lightest years on record, even with the increased number in trees.

Senate inquiry may consider Timor labour
East Timor could join the list of potential Pacific nations to provide workers to Australia.
Tasmanian Senator Guy Barnett says if the need for labour is demonstrated, the inquiry will be broadened to include countries to Australia's north.
"The terms of reference includes the Pacific and the Pacific islands, and clearly having been in the Northern Territory there is obviously the view, that has been put to us, is that there should be consideration given to Timor and further north into Asia," he said.

Educate young to become good growers, wine judge urges
Turbulent times in the grape growing sector are not deterring younger people from planning a future in the wine industry.
There has been a National Wine Schools Show in Adelaide this week, where students from around the country have showcased more than 70 wines and voiced confidence in the future of the sector.
Wine critic and head judge Philip White says it is important to educate young people on the current problems so they can deal with similar scenarios when they take over the family vineyard in years to come.
"These kids live, if they're in wine regions, live in the face of the glut. They can see their grapes, their dad's grapes, hanging on the fence, they're not getting sold," he said.
"This is an essential thing for them to understand the other end of the cycle.

Hopes Landcare deal will revive movement
The first Landcare sister partnership has been established, as the movement looks at ways to reinvent itself.
The Tasmanian-based Tamar NRM and Victoria's Woady Yaloak Catchment Group will share their knowledge, and members hope the link will give them more independence and clout on the national stage.
Chairman of the Victorian group, Michael Rowe, believes other groups will be watching the experiment.
"I hope so and I hope some of them will follow suit because Landcare seems to be stagnating in some areas a little bit," he said.

Big harvest, good prices cheer cane growers
New South Wales sugarcane growers have begun one of the biggest harvests the state has ever seen.
After a tough few years, growers and millers are reporting high yields, high sugar content and strong world prices.
Rick Beattie, from the New South Wales Sugar Milling Co-op, says the state's three mills expect to crush 2.6 million tonnes of cane.
"Early indications from the Broadwater season are good yields and really good sugar, which is fantastic," he said.

Fuel prices more urgent than nuclear power, say farmers
The National Farmers Federation says the Federal Government needs to urgently tackle high fuel prices, ahead of developing nuclear power.
It is supporting another government inquiry into alternative fuels, which will look at whether a commercial biofuel industry is viable.
NFF president Peter Corish says many farm petrol and diesel bills have risen 70 per cent since 2004, and urgent action is needed to promote alternative fuels.
"There are real opportunities for a number of our agricultural industries and certainly our view is that both need to be focussed on but probably the opportunities that exist from biofuels are more immediate than will come from the nuclear debate," he said.
Meanwhile, ethanol production has been flagged as a potential new industry for Australia's biggest irrigation scheme.
Consultants from Perth and Brazil are looking at the viability of growing sugar cane in the second stage of the Ord River Irrigation Scheme, in Western Australia's far north.

Call for more climate research to maintain wheat production
There is a warning today that wheat production could fall by 15 per cent and cost the nation $1 billion over the next 30 years unless the grains industry steps up research into managing climate change.
A study of five major grain growing areas show a drop in production of between 5 per cent and 25 per cent, with shorter growing periods and higher threats from diseases and pests as the country gets warmer and drier.
Professor Peter Grace from the Institute of Sustainable Resources in Queensland, says farmers may need to look to new wheat varieties and better use natural resources like water.
"Drought resistance is probably the number one area we need to get into in Australia," he said.
"We have a long history of scientists who have done a lot of work in traditional plant breeding in drought resistance and have been very successful, so we're well positioned to meet what's going to happen in the next 30 to 50 years.
"Global warming is here, that is a proven fact. Farmers play a role in that as well by moving towards conservation tillage practices, so farmers are in the driver's seat."
Meanwhile, Western Australia's grain handler and marketer the CBH Group is upbeat about the winter growing season, even though many areas desperately need rain.
CBH has released its first crop yield estimate for the year, with a ballpark figure of 11.6 million tonnes.
Operations manager David Fienberg says CBH's predictions are largely on good summer sub-soil moisture reserves across broadacre regions.
"What we do is, we try and collect as much on-ground intelligence in terms of being really well set-up for those from the summer rains," he said.
"And there is fantastic sub-soil moisture there in the majority of the state.

Tough season ahead for WA sheep producers
Western Australian sheep producers are being urged to buckle up for a tough season.
There is no green feed in the southern half of the state, apart from extreme lower west and south coastal areas, and no rain in sight.
Livestock numbers at saleyards are rising as farmers destock bare paddocks.
Sheep management consultant Andrew Ritchie says graziers need to move soon.
"We have to take it on board mentally first that it is now a poor season and has been a poor season for at least two weeks," he said.

Big turnout tipped fo Farmfest
Despite poor seasonal conditions, consumer confidence is strong at one of Queensland's biggest agricultural field days.
Organisers of the three-day Farmfest near Toowoomba say they are on target for about 80,000 visitors, even though the region has had less than 20 millimetres of rain since the start of the year.
Barry Harley says producers are still opening their wallets.
"And although I don't believe there's still too many people rushing in and buying a $200,000 tractor on the site, the orders are very genuine and there is a tag on it when it rains, but some of the smaller items like quad bikes and silos and bits and pieces - huge sales have actually been recorded," he said.

US beef trade with S Korea on hold
US plans to resume its beef trade with South Korea are on hold over new concerns about American abattoirs.
Exports were to begin this week, but officials are concerned beef destined for South Korea will be processed in the same plants as beef from foreign animals, or cattle over 30 months of age.
Andrew Negline from Cargill Beef Australia says the delay will just create more uncertainty in the market.
"We know the US is coming back in, from Australia's point of view we need to see that re-entry rather than later to take the uncertainty out of the market," he said.
"Their buying habits have gone on hold if you like and you can imagine there's a lot of traffic between Korea and the US in anticipation of the market opening up from the US.
"There have also been a lot of offers out of the US well below the Australian market price."

Food origin labelling standards come into effect
From today it is compulsory for retailers to identify the country of origin of fresh food.
Fresh fruit, vegetables, nuts and seafood will have to be clearly labelled.
Mike Redmond from the Virginia Horticulture Centre in South Australia says the industry will now push for labelling of frozen, packaged and processed food.
"Look it's about giving the consumer the right to choose whether they're going to buy an Australian product and all the good things that go with that like all our food safety standards which are some of the most rigorous in the world, and they get to choose," Mr Redmond said.

Wood exporter dumps bid for global softwood market
After two years of planning, Australia's oldest woodchip exporter has abandoned its bid to enter the global softwood market.
A glut of softwoods is looming after an infestation of the North American timber beetle in Canada.
Vince Phillips from South East Fibre Exports at Eden, in New South Wales, says world prices have been forced 20 per cent below Australian production costs.

McGuigan vineyard plans concern SA grape growers
Grape growers in South Australia's Riverland are concerned about plans by McGuigan Simeon Wines to develop a 400-hectare vineyard.
The company wants vines at Wentworth, in south-western New South Wales to be in full production by 2009-2010.
The news comes just days after 160 growers were told their contracts with the winery will remain suspended for next harvest.
Chris Byrne from the Riverland Wine Grape Growers Association says the type of development is detrimental to the whole industry.
"We have made the point that unless the industry with their help gets right behind the sort of strategic planning that we are encouraging and does something as an industry about rationalising, restructuring and supporting the growers that have built the industry, then that whole proposal is really counter productive to our interests," he said.
There was a 10 per cent jump in the amount of wine exported from Australia in the 12 months to the end of May, to a record 726 million litres.
The Wine and Brandy Corporation says the value of exports grew slightly to almost $2.8 billion, despite prices dropping 34 cents per litre.

E Timor looters destroy rice, maize reserves
Looters in the East Timor capital of Dili have destroyed more than 40 tonnes of rice and maize seed reserves.
The seed normally supports thousands of subsistence farmers across five districts.
The government has warned people not to eat the seed because it has been treated for pests and diseases and to encourage rapid early growth.
East Timorese Minister for Agriculture, Estanislau Da Silva, says more will urgently be needed for next year's crop.
"Several thousand - at least up to five to six districts - especially subsistence farmers they will suffer if we don't have those seeds readily available (by) I would say no later than September because then we will use October to distribute it," the Minister said.

Thieves target banana plantations
Soaring banana prices are making the fruit attractive to thieves at plantations near Coffs Harbour, in New South Wales.
Three thefts have been reported so far, with a shortage of fruit due to damage caused by cyclone Larry in north Queensland.
Tony Heidrich from the Banana Growers Council says it is likely to be more than a one-man operation, given the size of the stolen bunches of bananas.
"It's possibly an under-reported crime. I think there's a perception out there in the community that it's a soft crime with the perception that nobody's getting hurt as a result of a crime," he said.

Cooler change disrupts cows' milk production
A cold snap across south-eastern Australia is even affecting the cows at Hamilton, in Tasmania's Derwent Valley.
With temperatures plunging to minus three degrees celsius, and even minus 5.8 degrees celsius overnight on Tuesday, the dairy cows on Dave Jones' farm have dropped a litre-and-a-half of milk a day.
He says frozen machinery is causing long delays in milking, disrupting the cows' regular milking and pasture routines.
"For the last three or four mornings we've tarped the whole dairy in and we've got a little bit of a heater in there which warms it up by about a degree, but for the last three mornings we've spent the first two to three hours defrosting the machines and getting all the electronics working," Mr Jones said.

AWB seeks Federal Court ruling on documents
Wheat exporter AWB has returned to the Federal Court today, asking it to decide which documents before the oil-for-food inquiry are protected by legal professional privilege.
Last month the Federal Court ruled AWB's apology document was not covered and could be made public.
The court also ruled that Commissioner Terence Cole had the power to decide whether other documents before the inquiry, including AWB's own internal investigation of the oil-for-food program, were protected.

Tassie growers want higher forward grain prices
Tasmanian grain growers are unhappy with forward contracts for feed grain for the coming harvest.
Crosby Lyne from the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association says average wheat and barley feed grain prices at $190 to $195 a tonne are not on parity with mainland prices, even allowing for freight.
He says the island's forward grain prices should be higher, given lower world production and dry conditions putting pressure on yields.
"We believe Tasmanian grain growers aren't being offered enough for their grain for the coming harvest," he said.

Wine industry to solve its own oversupply problem
The wine industry says it will not ask the Federal Government for a financial bail out and will try to solve the grape glut itself.
Industry bodies, leading wine companies and federal and state governments are meeting in Melbourne today to try to find a way through the oversupply problems embattling the industry.
Stephen Strachan from the Winemakers Federation of Australia believes the sector can fix its own mess.
"I don't think there'll be any silver bullets and I don't think we'll come out this afternoon saying we've got a solution to get through this surplus next year, it's just not going to happen," he said.

Summit debates rural health plan
A plan to train rural doctors as specialists is being debated at a health summit in the southern Queensland town of Chinchilla today.
The Rural Doctors Association's president, Dr Ross Maxwell, says there is still a massive shortage of doctors and an insufficient intake of students to meet demand.
He is supporting a plan to train doctors to be specialists in rural areas and have general knowledge of obstetrics, anaesthetics, Indigenous health and surgery.

Aust urged to take more responsibility for uranium waste
Australia has been told it needs to take more responsibility for the waste produced from exporting uranium.
About 40 per cent of the world's uranium stocks can be found in Australia and it is shipped to the US, Japan and Europe for use in nuclear power.
A founder of Greenpeace but now one of the world's main supporters of the nuclear industry, Dr Patrick Moore, says Australia should consider using nuclear power.
But he says the nation must take more responsibility for dealing with nuclear waste.
"I think you wave it goodbye at the dock and wash your hands of any responsibility for what goes on in the world," he said.

Water sales should be treated as capital gain, say Nationals
Farmers and irrigators could be taxed at a lower rate for any water they sell under the National Water Initiative after lobbying from the National party.
Former Nationals leader John Anderson met with the Prime Minister yesterday, arguing water sold to the scheme should be treated as a capital gain rather than income, attracting a lower tax rate.
Mr Anderson says taxing the water at premium rates is unfair.
"This is about farmers feeling that the Government is going to keep good faith with them," he said.

Eastern states begin to offload stock
We heard yesterday about WA graziers offloading stock with the dry conditions, 
and the trend is also starting to appear in western New South Wales and the Victorian Mallee.
About 8,000 ewes and wethers were offered at a special sheep sale at Swan Hill yesterday.
Livestock agent Cameron Mckay says many farmers in the region are supplementary feeding their stock and desperately need rain.
"Western New South Wales probably had a better start than the Mallee but now with continuing dry conditions the feed that has germinated is drying up and the frosty conditions it's also not helping growing conditions at all," he said.
There was a very slight recovery in wool prices this week, with the benchmark eastern market indicator up one cent to 728 cents a kilogram clean.

Scientists to test new bait chemical
Experts say a new chemical to be tested next week has the potential to change the way some of Australia's pest animals are controlled.
The Invasive Animal Cooperative Research Centre says the poison, PAP, was originally designed by the US military, and can be used on wild dogs, feral pigs and foxes.
Research scientist Dr Ricky Spencer says the trials will test the antidote component of the chemical, which is something the current poison known as 1080, does not have.

No quick answer to cane toads, say scientists
Scientists have been meeting in Brisbane this week to work out how to beat the cane toad problem.
More than 40 researchers have shared their work at the national cane toad workshop, and heard evidence of how the toxic toad is adapting to its environment.
Ideas thrown up include bio-control methods and repelling devices, and Dr Tony Robinson from the CSIRO says while there is some inspiring work being done, there's still no magic answer.
"We're talking five to seven years, I mean that's the sort of range for any of those projects, we can't offer any immediate solution to the cane toad problem, which is frustrating," he said.

Quick growing kingfish trial under way in SA
Under a project in South Australia, captive kingfish will be tricked into doubling their growth rate, by having an extra long summer.
Port Lincoln-based company Clean Seas will work with a Danish company to try to halve the time it takes to grow a kingfish to restaurant size.
Instead of being kept in sea cages, Marcus Stehr from Clean Seas says the fish will live in onshore tanks at Arno Bay.

Woolly cattle open small opportunity for hobby farmers
Two cattle producers in New South Wales are trying to downsize their cattle to produce a miniature breed which can also be shorn like a sheep.
Brendan and Yolana Haverfield breed Galloway cows on their hobby farm near Sutton in the southern highlands.
The cows are between 100 and 120 centimetres high, and apart from being extremely docile, the couple say their hair is like cashmere wool.
"It's a Scottish breed, from the Galloway area of Scotland, good for beef, they can be milked, also their hair can be spun like wool.

Farmers fire up for Finke fun
Pastoralists south of Alice Springs have a chance to forget about the lack of rain this weekend at the biggest event on their social calendar.
The 31st Finke Desert Race involves hundreds of off road vehicles and motorbikes, tackling a track which starts just south of the Alice, and ends up in the small outback community.
Billy Hayes from Deep Well Station says everyone looks forward to the race as a chance to catch up with family and friends.
"You know there's not too many pastoralists that I know south of Alice that don't take the weekend off to come and watch the Finke Desert Race or, you know, a lot of them have got family or family members competing in it as well," he said.

Loss of GPS signal causes problems for grain growers
Farmers are experiencing major problems with their global positioning systems (GPS) because two US military satellites have been taken out of service.
Many grain growers use GPS technology to help them sow crops in the most efficient way, pinpointing crop rows to within centimetres.
But the loss of signal is now causing major accuracy problems and drop-outs, particularly in the middle of the afternoon.
Phil Harris from GPS-Ag in South Australia does not know when the problem will be fixed.
"It's unfortunate at the time that it is happening and of course there's still a lot of farmers out there seeding ... now there are a lot of farmers have commenced on their spray program," he said.

Childers farm tested for cane smut
There are fears that an exotic disease discovered on a sugarcane farm in south-east Queensland could be the devastating cane smut.
Queensland's Department of Primary Industries has quarantined a property near Childers after suspect plants were discovered late last week.
Cane smut, which can stunt growth and cause production losses of between 20 and 30 per cent, is considered the highest exotic disease risk for sugarcane in Australia.
While the Canegrowers Organisation says the disease has not been confirmed, general manager Ian Ballantyne says the industry is prepared.
"Canegrowers are members of a thing called Plant Health Australia and through Plant Health Australia we bring together BSES, state and federal governments, ourselves, and other parties who are interested and have an affect on disease incursion," he said.
"We've learnt a lot I think over the years from citrus canker and things like the popia fruit fly and now we think it's better to overreact early than under-react."

Rain hits NSW cropping areas
Cropping areas in New South Wales have received their first major rainfall for the season.
Conditions took a turn for the better on the same day last year and while the rain was not as heavy this time, it was just as welcome.
Cereal cropping producers across inland New South Wales were facing another bleak season, with no rainfall during autumn across the majority of the state.
This changed on Saturday. Most inland areas received between 10 and 30 millimetres, with the majority of the cropping belt receiving around the old inch mark.
Many tractors have started up this morning, to get the winter crop in.
Subsoil moisture levels are still very low to non-existent and so crops will again be reliant on in crop rainfall.
Michael Matthews from Young says the rain does bring hope.

US lowers wheat production forecast
The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) has again lowered its 2006 and 2007 wheat production forecast, at the same time as grain prices soar.
Production estimates now total just over 1.8 billion bushels, or more than 48 million tonnes.
Last month's US wheat forecast was down 11 per cent from the previous marketing year.
Now, USDA World Agriculture Outlook Board chairman Gerald Bange says continued dry conditions have cut the 06/07 forecast by 14 per cent, and stocks by nearly 25 per cent.
"And as a result of that, we are in fact, seeing a stronger price," he said.
"The price outlook now calls for about $3.90 at the midpoint which is up nearly 50 cents from the 2005-06 years and would, in fact, be the highest price since the $4.30 that was recorded in 1996, contributing to lower US wheat exports, forecast off about 100 million bushels, at about 900 million bushels.
The USDA report caught commodity traders in Australia offguard.
Tony Smith from Plum Grove says no one was expecting such significant changes.
"Well, in the first two minutes, the market reacted as expected," he said.
"The futures exchanges opened up, the markets went straight up and then within two minutes everyone, including myself, was caught by surprise because they just fell in a heap.

No bail-out package for grape growers
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran has refused to bail out the nation's struggling grape growers, saying the Government is not to blame for the current oversupply.
Ahead of a national wine summit held in Melbourne on Friday, industry groups were looking for partial compensation from the Government to help growers mothball or hibernate their vines.
But Mark McKenzie from Winegrape Growers Australia says the proposals were not even put on the table, and it is a disappointing result.
"The Minister made it clear that it's an industry issue the industry needs to sort itself out," he said.
"Outside the framework of what's currently available there wasn't anything special put on the table other than additional funding to scope the nature of the issue to provide more information to growers to allow them to make those commercial decisions for themselves going forward."
In the west, many grape contracts are coming to an end, and John Griffiths from the WA Wine Industry Association says the situation is fragile.
While warm climate growing areas have already been hit hard, with fruit left on the vine, the oversupply problem is expected to hit cooler areas over the next two years.
Mr Griffiths says the real crunch for WA is yet to come.
"Even if the news itself isn't great it's better that it's clear.
"You're either industry and your going to make some profits or your probably ought to get out. "

Telcos urged to express interest for bush broadband
The Federal Government has called for expressions of interest from telecommunications companies who can provide broadband Internet services to regional areas.
The $1.1 billion Connect Australia package aims to improve services outside the capital cities.
Industry analyst Paul Budde says telcos should not be competing for business, but allocated a region to ensure wider coverage.
"People in regional Australia should not have to pay more for that sort of service than people in metropolitan areas, this is infrastructure this is not luxury, everybody needs it, and therefore it has to be treated as such," he said.

Rural Australians honoured for Queen's Birthday
Rural Australians have been well represented in the Queen's Birthday Honours list.
A well-known grazier from north-west Queensland says he is surprised at being named a Member of the Order of Australia.
Former National Party president Don Mcdonald from "Devoncourt Station" near Cloncurry has been recognised for his services to regional health, agriculture, infrastructure and politics.
"I'm delighted to have received it, I'm just in total disbelief that this sort of thing would happen because I don't see myself as having done anything more than so many other people who live in the bush do, you know, to help their communities," he said.
Fellow former Nationals president, Helen Dickie has also been named a Member of the Order of Australia.
Being awarded a Medal in the Order of Australia has not silenced Victorian dairy farmer Ann Jarvis in her criticism of the Federal Government's user-pays higher education policy.
Mrs Jarvis was awarded for her service to education, the dairying industry, women in agriculture and the community of the Kiewa Valley.
She says the Federal Government has a moral obligation to put more money into tertiary education.
"I think that we've forced our rural children away from universities in the last 10 years," she said.
"The cost to attend university is enormous. I dont' believe that brains necessarily only belong to city people. I think there is a great deal of intellectual brain drain from country areas because people can't afford to avail themselves of tertiary level education."
Broken Hill Identity, "Brushman of the Bush" and well known former ABC TV outback adventurer Jack Absalom received an Order of Australia for services to painting and charitable works.
Winemakers are also feature prominently, with honours going to South Australia's Brian Barry and the Hunter Valley's Bruce Tyrrell, who believes the industry will turn around.
"Oh yeah it's amazing you know, you go from being the darling to the devil," he said.
"The Australian wine industry is copping a heap of bad press at the moment, but behind that is still this phenomenol growth.

Desert race comes to an end
Australia's most challenging off-road race is coming to an end at Alice Springs.
Hundreds of competitors in the Finke Desert Race have pitched their buggies, cars and motorbikes at 450 kilometres of some of the toughest terrain in the country.
It is windy, freezing cold and extremely dusty at the 31st Finke Desert Race.
Only a third of competitors usually complete the track, which is full of bulldust, desert oak trees to dodge and about 70 kilometres of woops which is like driving over thousands of volkswagons in a row.
Already the winners in the buggies have made it home, first place went to father/son team Shannon and Ian Wrench from Warrnambool, Victoria.

Ploughmen dig in at championships
Twenty of Australia's best ploughmen battled for first place at the weekend's National Ploughing Championships in Tasmania.
Pitting their technical precision against the clock, farmers also had to work in dense fog while competing at Cressy, in the state's north.
Two Victorians were the winners, Adrian Tilling for conventional ploughing, and David Smith for reversible ploughing, and both will represent Australia at the world titles next year.
Rhonda Smith from the World Plough Organisation says success all depends on the day.
"Ploughmen can plough good on one day and draw a good plot and then some ploughmen can plough under pressure," she said.

Cane smut found on Qld property
Authorities have confirmed the discovery of the exotic disease sugar cane smut at a farm near Childers, in south-east Queensland.
At the start of another cane crush, it is a massive blow to the sector, which has been enjoying good prices.
The infected property has been quarantined and wider surveillance is underway.
Property owner Joe Russo, who is also the chairman of the Isis District Canegrowers, says it has been a horrible time.
"Not only myself, but the whole family, are quite devastated to hear the news," he said.
"There's no doubt we've all understood the disasterous effects smut can bring, but to have it recorded not only in your district, then to have it on your own property, is of a concern."
The entire cane crop on the east coast will be inspected for the disease.
Queensland has been one of only a few commercial growing regions in the world without cane smut, which can cause major production losses.
Eoin Wallis from research group BSES Limited says the situation is extremely serious, even though only one infected plant has been found.
"At the moment, because we haven't found anymore plants, we are not able to say whether this is a widespread infestation or simply quite local," he said.

Water shortage threatens lettuce supplies
Production of Australian lettuces could drop by up to 60 per cent by Septelettuce shortagember because of a lack of water in storages outside Melbourne.
Southern Rural Water has cut water allocations to the Bacchus Marsh and Werribee irrigation districts to between zero and 5 per cent, leaving growers without water, or using recycled waste water.
One of Victoria's biggest coloured lettuce growers, Frank Ruffo, says the both domestic and export supplies will be hit.
"We use all our water for growing lettuce, salads," he said.
We supply on a national basis around Australia and we also supply overseas so that is going to ruin our export markets, especially when we've managed to take them off the American suppliers.

Results on mad cow disease research may take years
Scientists say it could take years to work out whether there is a new strain of mad cow disease or whether the original virus has mutated.
US researchers have confirmed that two cases of BSE in Texas and Alabama during the past year are a new variety of the disease, which is similar to others in Europe and Japan.
Professor Colin Masters from Melbourne University says it is frustrating for agricultural industries which have to wait for the research before finding out whether they can stop any further spread of the disease.
"So far they're very rare and they've only been found because of this massively increased surveillance," he said.

Wheat growers call for continued government assistance
With a new farm bill on the horizon in the United States, wheat growers there have joined calls for continued government assistance.
The wheat industry is concerned it has a shaky future, after figures showed wheat's portion of the national crop has fallen 10 per cent since the 1980s.
Grower organisations say the wheat industry is at a crossroads with little growth in exports, lower domestic consumption and loss of acres to other crops.
As well, there are concerns that wheat diseases are affecting farmers' profits and there is little research being done on new wheat varieties.
But while the the industry is keen to encourage new research, it has emphasised it must make economic sense for farmers to want to plant wheat in the first place.
According to the US department of agriculture, the wheat sector is facing long term challenges to its profitability, but asking for increased subsidies from government is not the answer.
The USDA says subsidies only artificially increase demand, rather than provide long term solutions.
The industry plans to hold a wheat summit later this year to try to work out how it can stay profitable and competitive in the international market.
The Indian Government has called for tenders to supply 2.2 million tonnes of wheat, after a lack of interest in a 3 million tonne deal last month.
Only 800,000 tonnes was allocated from the original wheat tender, with two thirds expected to be filled by AWB.

Livestock producers warned over feeding requirements
The Western Australian Department of Agriculture is warning livestock producers to either reduce sheep numbers or pay closer attention to feeding requirements.
There is a severe lack of feed due to dry weather and stock deaths have been reported because sheep are not getting enough roughage.
Veterinary officer Marnie Thomas says producers are feeding their sheep lupins as an alternative feed source but they need greater diversity to maintain condition.
"If you've got stock that you can quit, I would definitely be quitting them now because if this dry keeps going, you're going to be looking at supplementary feeding for anywhere up to six weeks from the break of the season, right up to eight weeks, depending on what sort of pasture you've got," she said.

Study looks at heat stress concerns for helmet wearers
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) is studying how heat stress might affect station workers forced to wear helmets while riding horses.
Graziers across northern Australia have raised concerns that compulsory helmet wearing for employees could increase body temperature and lead to heat stress and fatigue.
With some stations forcing the introduction of helmets as a safety measure, MLA's Wayne Hall hopes the research will lead to better helmet designs.

Cool dry season could mean early Top End mangoes
Cooler than average weather this dry season in the Northern Territory could bring forward the mango harvest.
Night time temperatures across the Darwin rural area have been more than three degrees cooler than average this month.
Flowering is under way across mango orchards of the Top End and extension officer Greg Owens says fruit could mature by mid September.
"The trees were pretty much set up for it from a very small harvest season last year," he said.
"They had good reserves from the tree and having that cold snap follow on from that rain seems to have triggered a lot of trees that were ready to go off.

Farmers call for more help to for biodiesel production
Farmers trying to establish commercially viable biodiesel operations say the Federal Government needs to do more to encourage development.
Victorian farmer Josh Pearse, who has set up a plant at Donald, in the state's west, says taxing biodiesel at the same level as ordinary diesel is a disincentive to farmers making or using it.
He says in the face of rising fuel costs, grain farmers particularly, have a great opportunity to start growing some of the fuel they need for their farms.
"There should be a few more incentives for people to actually get into the biodiesel industry, and even for some sort of tax benefit for farmers and for people to start using biodiesel," he said.

Demand soars for softwood
Australian softwood producers say they are experiencing their highest levels of demand for years, with more shipments of pine woodchips and steadily rising prices.
Growing demand from the Japanese paper industry is driving the export market growth, as the Japanese economy picks up and the consumption of paper and paper products increases.
Phil Lloyd, from South Australian processor Auspine, says the last 12 months have seen demand exceeding supply.

WA finds nifty solution to cane toad menace
A specially trained sniffer dog has been chosen to hunt down cane toads at the border between Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
Nifty, a two-year old female belgian malinois, will begin training immediately and start work in Kununurra from September.
Gaye Mckay from WA's Department of Conservation and Land Management says Nifty is part of an overall plan to keep cane toads out.
"Anything that can stop cane toads from entering WA is a worthwhile investment," she said.

Rural workers at risk of cancer, report shows
A new report has found workers in rural industries like agriculture, forestry and mining are most at risk of developing cancer.
The study by the Queensland Cancer Fund and the University of Sydney has found twice as many people as previously thought are exposed to cancer-causing substances at work, including pesticides, UV rays and dust.
Gordon Gregory from the National Rural Health Alliance, says country workers face a double whammy, because a lack of medical care in the bush can severely reduce the chance of survival.
"Agriculture forestry and fishing are dangerous occupations - but normally we tend to think in terms of accidents," he said.
"Now we have got this report which frankly surprises me that it is also the cause of high rates of cancers.

Snowy Hydro rethinks development plans
Snowy Hydro says it will be forced to borrow heavily, now that its planned privatisation has been scrapped but staff jobs are safe.
The Federal Government scuttled plans to sell the power generator earlier this month.
Managing director Terry Charlton says the sale would have given Snowy Hydro access to extra funds but the company now must rethink its development plans.
"We're looking at increasing our borrowings, cutting back on capital expenditure, cutting back on other expenditures, hopefully being able to defer some expenditure on the scheme and substitute it with other growth opportunities," he said.

Farmsafe maintains cancer risks minimised
A farm safety group has defended the sector's use and management of pesticides after a new report said people in agriculture were among the most at risk of developing cancer.
The study by the Queensland Cancer Fund and the University of Sydney found twice as many people as previously thought faced cancer-causing substances at work, including pesticides, UV rays and dust.
But Jamie Cupples from Queensland-based Farmsafe says risks have been greatly minimised because primary producers must go through chemical accreditation programs.
"We haven't had the evidence that there's a huge rate of cancer in the rural industry being caused by pesticides," he said.

More sugar cane smut cases under investigation
Queensland authorities are investigating possible new cases of the fungal disease sugar cane smut.
The disease, never before found in eastern Australia, has the potential to reduce cane yields by up to 30 per cent.
It was confirmed on a farm near Childers yesterday and further cases are now suspected in another block on the same property.
Chris Adriaansen, from Queensland's Department of Primary Industries, will not say how many plants are affected, but denies smut is here to stay.
"No, no, absolutely not. It may be that we will find sequentially a number of small infestations over a period of you know it could be 12 months or even possibly longer," he said.

Wool campaign targets US market
A test marketing campaign for wool has been launched to try to tap into the billion dollar clothing market in the United States.
Saks of Fifth Avenue and retailer Dillards have been signed to try to educate the US consumer about the benefits of wool by marketing woollen trousers.
The Woolmark company says there is a huge market to be gained from the $6 million investment.
But consultant Graham Lean says the push in the US is misguided and the best way to increase grower returns is to cut costs.

Gold price fall puzzling
Resource analysts are puzzled why the price of gold suffered a meltdown in New York trade overnight.
The price of gold dropped $US44.50 an ounce, its biggest single day drop since 1991.
Hartley's resource analyst Andrew Rowell cannot explain the decline in gold and copper prices.
"We're not actually really sure as to why it's such a big drop. It came off last night in New York, it started at the start of the day and kept going," he said.
"I guess we're at a bit of a loss to see exactly the reasons why it was so pronounced."
In other commodity news, Australia's export earnings from mineral resources fell $1 billion to $21 billion for the March quarter.

Queenslander wins NFF top job
Queenslander David Crombie is the new president of the National Farmers Federation (NFF).
Mr Crombie is the former chairman of Meat and Livestock Australia and former chairman of the Queensland Reds.
Mr Crombie takes over from outgoing president, cotton grower Peter Corish.
Victorian dairy farmer Allan Burgess was the other candidate for the peak farming group's top job.
The announcement was made in Canberra, where farmers from all over Australia and representatives of a wide range of agricultural industries are meeting, to draw up their strategies and priorities for the coming 12 months.
Delegates from around Australia will today be debating the NFF's stand on telecommunications and native vegetation.
The telecommunications debate is timely given the NFF's initial support for the Telstra plan to maintain a presence in rural Australia.

Cold snap takes toll on prawn operator
The cold weather snap in the far north of Western Australia has taken its toll on one aquaculture venture.
Six hundred and sixty thousand prawn fingerlings are feared dead after the spate of cold weather, including overnight lows of eight degrees.
The marine prawns stop feeding at 20 degrees and die at 13 degrees, and owner Ian Crimp says there is not much movement in the tank.
"The water monitor shows the temperature is down to 14.5 at the present time and it's getting pretty low and will be probably devastating for the prawns," he said.
"These little ones might be in the great prawn house in the sky by now. Prawn heaven!"
The rising cost of fuel is also threatening the seasonal harvest of banana prawns.
Some trawlers caught up to 10 tonnes more when authorities extended the season by a fortnight.
But fisherman Ean Casey says the good catches were not enough to cover fuel, competition from cheaper imported prawns, and labour shortages.
"It's been was a worse year than previous years even though we caught more," he said.
"This year we found it very hard to get people. We will probably look at bringing in overseas labour (from Indonesia).

Summer fruit industry looks for Govt support
There are calls for Federal Government support for the summer fruit industry following signals the Taiwanese export market will not reopen in time for next year's harvest.
Exports were suspended late last year because of Taiwanese concerns over a Queensland fruit fly.
Summerfruit Australia's Wayne Boucher fears if exports to Taiwan resume, an extra 10,000 tonnes of stone fruit could flood the domestic market.
"We'd have to say that it is looking highly unlikely that the work that is currently being done will be completed in time for us to get access to the Taiwanese market in time for this season," he said.

New concerns over NSW land clearing laws
Landholders across New South Wales are being warned the Native Vegetation Act will have a far greater impact than was originally thought.
The Act stops broadscale land clearing across the State.
Gabrielle Holmes's family has been prosecuted twice under the Act, without conviction, for the removal of native invasive scrub.

Pricey pup fetches new record
What price would you pay for a good working dog?
Well you can expect to dig even deeper after a Victorian bred kelpie fetched $5,400 over the weekend.
Tasmanian farmer Neil Monks bought the 20-month-old pup sight unseen, and had no qualms at forking out an Australian record amount for the dog, Bagalla Mick.
"The way I look at it there's no limit on the value of a good dog," he said.

Weather takes its toll on farmers
Drought is worsening across south-eastern Australia.
In the New South Wales Murray Valley region, 650 irrigators are now eligible for exceptional circumstance assistance until next January.
In Victoria's north-east, several farmers are shooting sheep, or selling stock below market prices.
Director of Hume Corridor Community Health, Wayne Weaire, is organising community barbeques in the region to support farmers:
"In the last drought we found that people if they became isolated from each other, if they simply worked hard on farm or simply sat around wondering what they could do there were enormous amounts of stress," he said.
"It just has an impact on the whole sense of well being on the family or the individual and we found last time the greatest lesson was how important it is to get out there and talk and get access to information and support from each other and from other agencies."
And cold weather is a problem too.
Citrus growers in the Murray Valley and the Riverland are keeping an eye out for frost damage.
Industry experts claim that damage occurs if the temperature drops below -2 overnight for longer than four hours and that has already happened several times this winter.
Some growers fear a repeat of 1982 when young trees died because of the extreme weather.
Horticulturalist Steven Falivene says growers need to keep in contact with their citrus packer if they believe their fruit has been damaged by frost.
"The real damage happens at say two weeks afterwards," he said.

'Ultra virgin' olive oil technique patented
A Tasmanian olive grower has patented a new oil processing technique to produce what he calls "ultra virgin" olive oil.
Brian Hinson says olives grown in Tasmania's cold climate produce higher than world standard levels of oleic acid, giving an even healthier oil that should attract a premium.
He says the secret to the high oil levels is harvesting early and taking no more than 12 hours from picking to processing.

Incoming farm leader wants united voice for agriculture
Building a united voice for agriculture and raising the community's awareness of farming are just two of the aims for newly elected National Farmers Federation president, David Crombie.
Mr Crombie, a businessman and former chairman of Meat and Livestock Australia, says the NFF's role is to push the farming agenda with government, and emphasise the importance of agriculture to the economy.
He says targeting falling memberships amongst farm organisations is also critical.
"We can't afford division, we can't afford confusing messages coming out of agriculture," he said.
"Look, I'd like to see all farm organisations members of NFF, but once again you have to create a valued proposition for those people, if a producer feels that there's no value in being a member of an organisation then he won't join, quite simply. I think the challenge for farm organisations and for NFF is to create that value proposition."
Outgoing President Peter Corish says the NFF's biggest challenge is to deal with the weak financial position of the organisation's farm body members.

Re-structure talks on the cards for peak seafood group
The future of the nation's peak seafood lobby group is uncertain, after directors placed the Australian Seafood Industry Council into voluntary receivership.
A funding shortfall from voluntary levies and a lack of communication is being blamed for its demise.
Territory representative Rob Fish says the industry is expected to meet within four weeks to discuss re-structuring.
"I am not aware of many industry associations that can work on voluntary contributions," he said.
"Most are levied across the industry, providing with constant budgets, so you can budget across. Without that, I can't see it working myself.

ALP figures back compulsory ethanol levels in fuel
The push to mandate ethanol levels in petrol has a new ally - the ALP, with key Labor figures in New South Wales and Queensland said to be pushing for a 10 per cent biofuel component in fuels.
A motion to that effect was unanimously passed at the NSW Labor conference last weekend..
The Labor move comes as the federal National Party leadership heads in the opposite direction, ruling out any compulsory standards being adopted despite a good deal of backbench and National Party support for biofuels.
The Government doesn't support mandating of alternative fuel because we believe that would have a very likely if not certain market distortionary effect," said Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran.
But NSW Labor MP for Bathurst, Gerard Martin, thinks the move to mandate ethanol levels in fuel is a "no brainer".
He says pressure is being brought to bear on Kim Beazley and the Federal Opposition to get behind a cleaner, cheaper renewable fuel.
