"There were some capital costs and some of those we will recover through the pricing of the water," he said.
"The water's available to our irrigators are Bacchus Marsh at an additional $410 a megalitre.

Farmers prevent vegetation clearing inspection
About 200 farmers have blockaded a property near the New South Wales town of Cobar, in a sign of growing anger at the state's native vegetation regulations.
The farmers stopped government officials inspecting the property yesterday, where legal clearing of invasive native scrub is under way.
The Wilderness Society is believed to have complained about the scrub removal.
Community spokesman Stuart Mosley says the farmer who owned the property did not have anything to hide, but local producers have had enough.
"We've got a family who is highly respected, who is held up by the Catchment Management Authority as being model land managers," he said.
"We have got the radical greens on the other side who are evangelically opposed to land clearing.
"We don't believe that is appropriate for our part of the state.
"Yesterday we stood in the middle of 12.5 million hectares of invasive native scrub land that ABARE [Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics] has identified as being at risk because of inappropriate native vegetation regulation.

Wheat virus found in commercial WA crop
Wheat streak mosaic virus has been found in a commercial crop in Western Australia for the first time.
Wheat seed was banned from entering WA last year to prevent the virus spreading into the state, but it was found in April this year.
Roger Jones, from the Department of Agriculture, believes the virus probably found its way west before the ban was imposed.
He says it has now been found on a farm at Merredin in the Wheatbelt.
"The danger from the disease is when you get early-sown crops, sown at a time of year when it's still warm," he said.
"The mites can actually build up to very large numbers.

Dairy industry fights fat perceptions
The dairy industry says growing concern over Australia's high obesity rates is turning the public off its products.
Dairy Australia is fighting back with a $4 million campaign to dispel the myth that dairy foods are fatty.
Spokesman Richard Lange says the industry needs to claw back its market share, to stop people turning to dairy substitutes.
"Milk is only 4 per cent fat, some consumers think that it's up to 17 per cent and that's a real myth that we need to bust in this campaign," he said.

Oil price tipped to boost wool market
The biggest buyer of Australian wool says high oil prices should help to drive up the wool market by another 10 per cent before Christmas.
Growers saw an early jump in prices in the first few months of this year but the market has remained fairly stagnant ever since.
Soaring oil prices have forced up the cost of synthetics, leading to more demand for wool.
Chris Kelly, from Chinese wool buyer Itochu, says the impact of the drought and demand from Chinese millers should also lift the market.
"The pipeline is very short, particularly in China and other wool consuming countries as well," he said.

India takes live exports market share
Rising fuel prices and the falling value of Asian currencies are beginning to have an effect on the northern live cattle export industry.
Figures from LiveCorp show the Indonesian market remains buoyant.
Once-strong sales to the Philippines have fallen 52 per cent in the past 12 months.
Angus Adnam, from the Queensland Live Export Association, says competing live exports from India are now a real force in Asian markets.
"The Philippine market was a great market a couple of years ago of course, but we have seen a big decline in the value of the Philippine peso," he said.
"Once again Indian beef continues to make huge inroads into that market, probably 180,000, 210,000 tonnes going into that market.

AWB finds more kickbacks documents
Thousands of documents previously withheld by AWB's inhouse lawyers have been discovered by the oil-for-food Inquiry.
The hearing into AWB's $290 million in kickbacks to the former Iraqi Government has reopened in Sydney.
Senior counsel assisting Commissioner Terence Cole, John Agius QC, opened proceedings by telling the inquiry that AWB had found yet more documents.
Mr Agius said 129 volumes had been located by AWB's internal lawyers, Rosemary Peevey and Jessica Lyons.
A further 69 volumes have been found in connection with Jill Gillingham, who has just taken the witness stand.
Ms Gillingham said she reported directly to Andrew Lindberg.
She negotiated contracts worth $750 million a year for storage, handling and movement of grain.
Ms Gillingham also told the inquiry she was the link between US public relations guru Peter Sandman and Mr Lindberg's so-called apology document.

Water use food labels mooted
Food from the Murray Darling Basin could one day bear labels which show it has been grown with the most efficient water use.
The plan is one of a number of ideas to be discussed at the Murray Darling Association's annual meeting next week.
General manager Ray Najar says it could help raise consumer awareness and better educate consumers.
"I think there's a misunderstanding of how much value there is in using water for irrigation in the Murray Darling Basin," Mr Najar said.
"There's obviously a certain select group of people that believe that irrigation shouldn't be occurring in the basin.

Water use produce labels mooted
Products grown in the Murray Darling Basin under best-practice water use could be labelled as such, similar to the Heart Foundation's tick or the 'Australian Grown' labels.
It is just one of a number of ideas to be put on the table at the the Murray Darling Association's annual meeting at Barham next month.
General manager Ray Najar says it could help raise consumer awareness of what is produced in the basin.

Farm dam management under scrutiny
Better regulation of farm dams in the upper areas of the Murray Darling Basin catchment area was brought to the attention of those attending the 11th national water conference in Sydney yesterday.
The Minister for the River Murray, Karlene Maywald, says while there is progress being made in providing the 500 gigalitres in environmental flows to the Living Murray project by 2009, she says the states now need to take the next step in the process.
She says all states need to work together to come up with co-ordinated approach to manage environmental and unregulated water flows and farm dams.
Ms Maywald also says the State Government has bought 11 gigalitres of water from irrigators willing to sell in recent time.
She is unable to disclose how much this has cost the Government.

Water data management plan needed: Matthews
There is a need to improve the way water data is managed across the country.
National Water Commission chairman Ken Matthews says information about where water is, how it is used and its quality needs to be readily available.
Representatives from all states and territories, science fields and peak bodies industry bodies met on Friday in Adelaide at the first water data summit to come to a national agreement.

Horsemanship course improves youths' job prospects
A group of young men from a remote Aboriginal community in north Queensland
have improved their job prospects and way of life by learning how to handle horses.
Twenty horses were seized from Palm Island three years ago in what the RSPCA said was one of the worst cases of animal cruelty it had seen.
State Government intervention has provided more infrastructure and equipment to deal with the hundreds of wild and domesticated horses on the island.
Ten young men, including Thomas Chookie, have been taking part in a horsemanship course near Ingham.
"I learnt so much ... I I built a greater self-confidence too and self-esteem, like how to be one with something that you can't really tame," he said.

Rural residents oppose daylight saving extension
Calls to extend daylight saving by more than a month in south-eastern Australia have not gone down well with in some parts of the country.
Victorian Premier Steve Bracks wants to bring his state into line with New South Wales, Tasmania and South Australia.
But Sharnie Mahar, who lives at Penong in far western South Australia, says daylight saving causes enough havoc with family life already.
"I don't agree with it at all actually," she said.
"Daylight saving is plenty long enough as it is.
"Because I live in such an isolated area, I find the days reasonably long as they are.

WA truffles may fill French gap
Truffles from Western Australia could soon be filling seasonal shortages of the delicacy in France.
A group of French chefs and a prominent truffle trader are in WA, looking at the local industry.
Chef Alain Fabregues believes Australian truffles should be sent to France during the northern summer, when European truffles are not available.
"This is a great move - you give us a great opportunity," he said.
"It's complementary, it does not compete against each other.

Grain delivery rules anger WA farmers
Some West Australian farmers are angry at new rules imposed by grain handler CBH for delivering grain this season.
Under the changes, farmers who overload grain trucks will have to forfeit the extra grain, with the proceeds going to local shires for road maintenance.
Farmers like Peter Boyle from York are upset because the scheme could involve extra costs.
"What they're aiming to achieve is certainly a lot better than what Main Roads is trying to do and it's better than what's in the eastern states," he said.
"I commend them for that.
"But some of the other hidden charges that they're bringing forth, that really is a bit of a stab in the back."

Oil exploration causes diver shortage
Increasing exploration for offshore oil reserves is causing a shortage of divers in the aquaculture industry.
Divers are being offered more than $300,000 a year for exploration work, compared $70,000 for work in the tuna and abalone sectors.
Martin Phillips, from South Australian Underwater Training, says oil exploration has not been a traditional job market for divers.
"Offshore jobs have been extremely difficult to get, you really had to know someone in that industry to get a job offshore," he said.

Domestic violence support 'hard to access' for migrants
A Victorian report has found migrant women in country areas are having trouble getting help to deal with domestic violence.
Across Australia one in every three to four families are affected by domestic violence.
The report says country women in particularly find it difficult to access support services.
Diana Orlando, from the Immigrant Women's Domestic Violence Service, says it is even harder for women from non-English speaking backgrounds.
"It's language barrier but it's also trust," she said.
"What the community said in the report was is it a service that's going to understand me, understand my culture, am I just going to be pressured to leave and break the family?
"I can't leave because I'm on a farm or I can't leave because I'm being threatened with deportation.

Drivers knowingly take risks: survey
A survey of country drivers has found high rates of complacency when it comes to drink driving, fatigue and speeding.
Insurance group AAMI has interviewed 2,500 motorists about their attitudes to road safety.
It found 40 per cent of people surveyed have probably driven while over the legal alcohol limit.
A third have momentarily fallen asleep at the wheel, while most have exceeded the speed limit.
Professor Craig Veitch, from James Cook University, is involved in a five-year investigation into regional road safety.
He says the figures show education campaigns are not working.
"A lot of people we've spoken with have remembered road safety messages that haven't been used in 10 years - that's the 'bloody idiot' campaign, that's been used," he said.

AWB attempts to retract Cole inquiry evidence
Tempers have flared at the oil for food inquiry, after wheat exporter AWB tried to keep secret a document that was entered into evidence six months ago.
Exhibit 412, which named Foreign Affairs Minister Alexander Downer, was the subject of a bitter exchange between Commissioner Terence Cole and AWB's lawyers this morning.
The exhibit related to Iraq's claim for compensation over wheat shipments it said were contaminated with iron filings.
In the February 2003 memo, AWB executive Peter Geary described the matter as sensitive and political and that AWB would need to inform Mr Downer.
AWB's lawyers leapt to their feet, demanding the document be removed.
They said it was confidential and part of AWB's Federal Court challenge.
After a heated altercation, Commissioner Cole took an immediate adjournment.

Useful rains fall on WA farms
Farmers in Western Australia have received the most useful falls of the winter season over the past 24 hours.
South-west and southern coastal areas have received the heaviest falls of between 50 and 70 millimetres.

Warm days cause grape vines to bud
The warmer than usual days and cold nights across Australia's south have caused grape vines to burst into life well ahead of normal spring budding.
Chardonnay vines have begun waking from their winter dormancy in South Australia's Coonawarra and Padthaway regions.
Viticulturist Dan Newson says that could result in an earlier vintage.
"The cold is playing a part," he said.
"What's happened is due to having dry soils and cooler temperatures overnight, the vines have gone into a deeper dormancy than what they normally will.

Cereal crops deteriorate amid dry weather
Cereal and canola crops in New South Wales have started to deteriorate.
Producers are pinning their hopes on a weak rain system due to come through tomorrow, but warmer than normal daytime temperatures are stressing crops.
Callers to ABC Central West this morning say 50 to 100 millimetres is needed within the next two weeks.
"Pretty much on a knifes edge at the moment. Our crops weren't sown until about mi- June. They are looking for rain," one caller said.
"It's very marginal here at the moment. Everything is just struggling. The pasture are going back into the ground and the crops are just sitting there," another said.
"Like the rest of the region, things will begin to deteriorate I should imagine," a listener said.

Dry conditions boost cattle, sheep sales
A growing number of farmers in the south-eastern states are selling off cattle due to dry seasonal conditions and low water allocations.
Saleyard prices dropped sharply yesterday as lower-quality dairy and beef cattle flooded into the market
Aaron Iori, from the National Livestock Reporting Service, says stock figures are dramatically higher than last year.
"If you look at south-east South Australia for instance, numbers there are about 80 per cent higher than this time last year," he said.
"That's specifically because the area north of Naracoote is in a severe situation and numbers are just continuing to come on to the market."
More sheep are also appearing in the saleyards because the dry winter has left many farms without feed.
Extra sales are being run in some places to cater for the higher numbers.
Gary Tapscott, from Elders, says the dry conditions are affecting everyone.

Spring forecast to be hot, dry
The National Climate Centre says Australia can expect hotter and drier conditions this spring.
The latest three-month outlook has a 60 per cent chance of higher-than-average temperatures across most of the tropics, a large part of south-eastern Australia and south-west West Australia.
There is also a higher risk of an El Nino weather pattern.
Senior meteorologist Grant Beard says higher temperatures in the Pacific and Indian Oceans also means there is less chance of average rainfall.
"Fairly large areas of north-east to northern parts of Australia stand an increased chance of having a poor start to their wet season," he said.
"There's a bit area of the Northern Territory and a fair bit of Queensland that has a less than 40 per cent chance of receiving their median rainfall from September to November.

MLA apologises for hacking tagging poll
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) has been forced to apologise, after two staff members hacked into an Internet poll on the National Livestock Identification System (NLIS).
The Rural Press poll asked readers to rate the performance of the system to trace animals from birth to death.
Early poll results showed more than 60 per cent of voters described NLIS as poor or terrible.
But a day later, after tampering by MLA staff, the poll showed 70 per cent believed the system was good or excellent.
MLA's managing director, David Palmer, says the staff involved have not been sacked.
He concedes the organisation's credibility is on the line.
"This is a very damaging moment. I take it very seriously, the company takes it very seriously, the board equally are most alarmed and shocked by it," he said.
"We will take all steps and measures to set us down a track to try to win back that integrity and win back that credibility that we just so desperately need from industry."
A long-time critic of NLIS, the Australian Beef Association, says the incident does nothing to boost the credibility of electronic identification.
It says the incident backs its claims the system can be easily corrupted.
Chairwoman Linda Hewitt says Mr Palmer should immediately sack the MLA staff involved.
"Possibly the man did not know what was going on, possibly he is very embarrassed, but he certainly needs to take very strong action straight away," she said.
"We will be keeping an eye on the situation.
"We will be putting press releases out about how we expect the whole situation to be handled and we will be questioning the integrity of the MLA's checking of itself."

Bishop makes no promises on education report
The federal Education Minister, Julie Bishop, has officially launched a report about the drought's impact on education, but has failed to give any commitment to implement its recommendations.
The study has called for more financial assistance to help drought-affected families educate their children.
Rural and remote families in New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria were interviewed as part of the study by Charles Sturt University.
It paid particular attention to tertiary education and found that rural students are disadvantaged.
It recommended that those who have to move away from home to attend university should be automatically eligible for youth allowance.
At the launch, Ms Bishop acknowledged the challenges of rural education, saying the Government is continually reviewing its assistance programs.

Satellite brings broadband to remote areas
The Federal Government has announced a deal to give remote communities full access to broadband Internet services.
Rural users will have access to the world's first purpose-built communications satellite, which has been launched by a company based in Thailand.
The Government will also offer subsidised services as part of an $876 million package linked to the Broadband Connect program, to keep costs similar to those of city services.
IT consultant Peter Saville says the satellite will give also remote areas cheaper phone calls and video conferencing.
"What this satellite system is going to do is provide a service to those people who can't get any form of broadband or high speed Internet access and open up a few other areas like voiceover IP," he said.

'Negative propaganda' behind forestry skills shortage
A Federal Government audit has accused the Greens and some mainstream media of peddling negative propaganda, which is exacerbating skills shortages in the timber industry.
The report details future construction projects worth $4 billion in Tasmania, Victoria and South Australia.
But it says industry will struggle to find the 4,500 people needed to build them.
Forestry Minister Eric Abetz says while the audit was completed by government authorities, it is independent.
Senator Abetz says it backs up his own anecdotal evidence showing young people are being turned off.
"You talk to the forestry schools around Australia and they will tell you that students feel it is difficult to enrol in forestry whilst they would like to, because of the pressure from green groups," he said.

EU bans contaminated rice imports
The European Union (EU) has stopped imports of US rice, which has been found to contain an unapproved genetically-engineered variety.
American authorities will have to prove rice shipments are free of GM traces, before they will be allowed in.
The EU's emergency measures follow discovery of tracts of experimental GE rice in US commercial supplies.
Germany's Bayer CropScience developed "LL Rice 601".
US Rice Federation spokesman David Coia claims the decision is preliminary.
"We're waiting for the final decision by the stating committee," he said.
"I think it's important to recognise that the US Food and Drug Administration has declared that the long grain rice variety in question is safe."
But the EU says its ban will last at least six months.

BHP tipped to break own profit record
After posting a record profit of $13 billion, analysts say BHP Billiton could be set for an even bigger result next year.
Hartley's resources expert Rob Brierly says increased demand from China and India should drive next year's profit to more than $15 billion.
He predicts the price of nickel, copper, iron ore and oil will continue to rise, putting BHP in line to continue to break records in Australian corporate history.

McGuigan confident of profit recovery
Australia's third-largest winery has recorded an $11.5 million loss.
McGuigan Simeon says for the first time shareholders will not be paid a dividend.
Growers have been angry with the company since it decided to suspend or not renew contracts for more than 100 Sunraysia and Riverland farmers last year.
Managing director Dane Hudson says the results are disappointing but he remains confident the company can recover.
"Our cashflow has been solid and that means our business will be around for some time," he said.
"We need to just grow our way out of it.

Ethanol producer welcomes mandate plan
Australia's largest ethanol producer is urging the Federal Government to follow New South Wales' decision to mandate the use of 10 per cent ethanol-blended petrol by 2011.
Premier Morris Iemma says the transition could lower fuel prices, reduce greenhouse gases and provide jobs in regional areas.
Manildra Group director Caroline Honan says the Federal Government must follow.
"As part of the ethanol industry we would like to congratulate the Premier on the announcement," he said.
"It is certainly a very positive for the ethanol industry.
"I think certainly the Premier has paved the way in terms of state legislation and we would like to see the Federal Government also move towards a mandate as well.

Canada finds new BSE case
Canadian authorities have reported another case of mad cow disease in a beef animal in Alberta.
An investigation is under way to find out which herd the animal came from.

Northern properties buy-up a 'long-term investment'
Two Queensland families are rumoured to have spent around $300 million on a major land and livestock purchase in Australia's north.
Graziers Peter Hughes and Bill Scott and their families have bought eight properties and 115,000 cattle from the Colonial Agricultural Fund.
While he will not say how much they paid, Mr Hughes says the 2 million hectare portfolio is a long-term investment.
"Whether it's good timing or not I am not sure but these opportunities don't arise very often, and when they arise you have got to grab them with both hands," he said.
"But we're in it for the long run. It's not a short-term thing for us.

Alliance to see cattle on Aboriginal land
A new alliance between land councils and the Northern Territory Cattlemen's Association should see more cattle re-introduced to ungrazed Aboriginal land.
Properties are being leased in exchange for improved roads and fences, as well as employment and training.
A deal has just been signed to move 2,5000 head of cattle from Deep Well Station on to Haasts Bluff, west of Alice Springs.
Pastoralist Billy Hayes thinks there will be benefits for everyone involved.
"They'll be as pleased to see cattle out there as we will be," he said.
"There'll be job outcomes, you know, for the young lads in the community.

Semi-black opals find excites miners
Miners in South Australia's remote outback are excited about a new find of rare, semi-black opals near Coober Pedy.
The gems have been unearthed in a field called Alan's Ridge, about 60 kilometres south of the town.
Opal miner John Dunstan says black opals are highly valuable, and can fetch up to $150,000 an ounce.
He says he could have made the find himself, if only he had kept working in the field a little bit longer.
"I left a claim down there a couple of months ago, I cancelled it and moved to another spot, and a couple of friends of mine went in there and decided to carry on a bit further and they found a nice parcel," he said.
"Bit of nice semi-black opal and quite valuable, so they're very happy, and actually I'm happy for them too.

Tractor drivers finish cross-country journey
A group of tractor drivers are toasting their success in crossing the continent in a series of veteran Chamberlains.
The members of the 9G Chamberlain Tractor Club have bumped along country roads all the way from Perth to the northern tip of Cape York.
They have been travelling at a top speed of 45 kilometres an hour.
Spokesman George Baldwin says they expect to raise $25,000 for the Royal Flying Doctor Service and regional hospitals.
"Most of the people come from Western Australia," he said.
"They've journeyed through from Perth to Ayers Rock to Alice Springs to Mount Isa, Cloncurry to Weipa.
"Yesterday we went to the tip with 15 tractors and everyone cheered and had champagne and what not.

Fire deal links science, Indigenous knowledge
A world-first agreement to link modern science and traditional Aboriginal knowledge is set to revolutionise fire management in the Top End of the Northern Territory.
The agreement is between various levels of government, a liquefied gas company and traditional Indigenous groups in the West Arnhem land area.
It has taken 10 years to develop.
Consultant Dr Justin Russell-Smith says the deal will protect areas recognised around the world for their biodiversity.
"For management at the local scale it's critical," he said.
"There's no other real economic opportunities for people to get employed, get back onto country.

Frost-hit tobacco crops attract low prices
Australian tobacco growers are receiving poor prices for their bales, as the selling season winds up.
Most growers are based in north-east Victoria, where a severe frost in early April took a heavy toll on tobacco plants.
Yesterday's sale at Myrtleford confirmed grower fears of a poor season as bales were assessed for quality.
John Moore, from the Tobacco Cooperative, says growers will lose money this year.
"There will be some financial hardship with people not harvesting all of their crop," he said.
"Perhaps what farmers in their terms call it the cream.

US looks to boost fire prevention
Authorities in the United States are looking at more effective ways to deal with severe bushfires.
Jerry Williams, the former director of fire management with the Department of Agriculture, says mega-fires are becoming more dangerous as global warming increases.
He says there needs to be more emphasis on encouraging the community to prevent fires.
"What we do is put everything every effort we can into combatting those fires," he said.

Water infrastructure upgrades 'waste of time'
The Productivity Commission says federal and state governments are wasting their time trying to save water through infrastructure upgrades.
The 2002 Living Murray Initiative included $500 million funding for better infrastructure to save water.
The water was intended to be released as environmental flows.
But the commission has released a report saying that is expensive, and often detrimental to the environment.
Spokesman Neil Byron wants to see an independent environmental trust set up to buy water from irrigators instead.

Flegg accused of conflict of interest
The leader of the Queensland Liberal Party has been accused of a conflict of interest over his multi-million dollar share and investment portfolio.
Dr Bruce Flegg has 100,000 shares in Australia's biggest irrigation property, Cubbie Station, worth around $16 million.
He also holds shares in other companies, including forestry and rural media.
Ethicist Noel Preston believes the portfolio is a moral and political risk for Dr Flegg.
"Particularly now that he's leader of the Liberal Party and particularly because the water issue, whether Cubbie Station or elsewhere in Queensland is such a high-profile concern," he said.
"It is quuite apparent that he should have a close look at the question of moving his business interests right away from there.
"He's open very easily, I think, to the charge of having no credibility if he were to offer opinions in that respect."
Dr Flegg says his share portfolio is listed on the Internet.
He says he has never hidden any relevant matters.
"My pecuniary interest has been on the public register now for almost three years for anyone to see," he said.
"Clearly the one message that comes out of that is I'm not here because I need a job.
"I'm here because I want to fix the health system in Queensland.
"In government there is a likelihood I would have to divest most or all of those holdings."

AWB executive announces retirement
AWB senior executive Jill Gillingham has announced her retirement, two days after giving evidence at the oil-for-food Inquiry.
The inquiry heard that Ms Gillingham acted as the go-between for former AWB boss Andrew Lindberg and American public relations expert Peter Sandman in the drafting of the so-called apology document.
She was also involved in negotiating $750 million a year worth of grain handling and storage contracts, and in co-ordinating AWB's response to the UN's Volcker inquiry.

Tasmanian farmers fear plantations' impact
Farmers in north-west Tasmania are demanding changes to state planning laws, to stop valuable farmland being converted to timber plantations.
They aired their concerns at a community meeting last night, as settlement looms on the sale of a 320 hectare property which is under contract to Great Southern Plantations.
About 170 farmers packed into the small memorial hall in the farming community of South Riana.
They are concerned for the future of the area, which has been built on successful dairy and cropping enterprises.
They are calling for the Tasmanian Government to abolish plantation development on prime agricultural land and will take their resolution to the Planning Minister next week.
The meeting comes within days of the King Island Council becoming the first in Tasmania to ban plantations on rural land, fearing they will risk the viability of dairy and beef industries.
Tasmanian Liberal Senator Richard Colbeck acknowledged there is a review under way into the tax arrangements for forestry managed investment schemes, labelled by some as the drivers of plantation expansion.

Amcor blames external factors for profit woes
Australia's second-largest cardboard manufacturer is blaming cyclone Larry, high fuel prices and a shift by the major supermarkets into plastic crates for a big fall in profits.
Amcor's Australian division has reported a 20 per cent profit plunge, down $54 million to $262 million, mainly due to falling cardboard sales.
But spokesman Paul Ward says the horticulture sector should not expect a big jump in packaging prices as a result.
"Price increases that may go through will purely relate to inputs that we have no control over," he said.
"Everyone knows about the fuel costs that severely impacts businesses like ourselves.

Oxiana to expand Prominent Hill mine
Oxiana Limited says it will spend $775 million developing the Prominent Hill copper gold mine in South Australia into one of the nation's biggest copper producers.
The mine, which is 120 kilometres from Olympic Dam, was discovered in 2001.
It is widely considered to be the find of the decade.

Tanami Gold due to begin first pour
Australia's most remote gold mine is expecting to pour its first gold this weekend.
The Tanami Gold Mine, on the edge of the Tanami Desert in northern Western Australia, opened in May.
It had expected its first gold to be sold last month.
But a number of setbacks, including poor roads for transporting materials, and a lack of workers has pushed back the start date.
Chairman Denis Waddell says after all the delays, they will be taking advantage of the good gold price.
"We'll be selling it, we've got a fair bit of expenditure at the moment, so we're not in the position at the moment were we can punt on where the gold price is going," he said

Stanton urges HGP declaration on beef
Nutritionist Rosemary Stanton is calling for better meat labelling that tells consumers whether Hormone Growth Promotants (HGPs) have been used in producing beef.
The Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority believes promotants are used to produce 40 per cent of all beef produced in Australia.
With a ban on HGPs in the European Union, Ms Stanton says shoppers here should be told about the history of the meat they are buying.
"There are two ways you could do this," she said.
"You could just simply label the beef that comes from animals that don't have HGPs, so that it could be no HGPs used in the production of this meat, or the second way would be that you could say that they have been used."

MLA poll rigging concerns Cattle Council
The Cattle Council has expressed concern over the involvement of peak body Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) in an Internet poll rigging scandal.
It was revealed yesterday that two employees rorted an online poll about the MLA-run National Livestock Identification Scheme (NLIS).
Council president Bill Bray is worried but he says the incident should not be taken out of context.
"There are a few silly individuals that have lost their way and done something stupid but that will be sorted out," he said.

Wine study encourages regional leadership
Winemakers are looking at how they can work together to try to cut down long working hours.
A new national project is under way looking at cellar door competition and leadership.
The Grape and Wine Research and Development Corporation wants to encourage leadership in local regions, including the Riverland and Hunter Valley.
Consultant Jill Briggs says poor leadership means many winemakers are overworked.
"There is a real sense that people who are growing wine and make wine are really time-poor," she said.
"They've got lots of brainpower and lots of initiative and lots of enthusiasm.

Growth conference examines seachanges' impact
A national conference in Tasmania this week is looking at whether rural and coastal communities can continue to cope with an influx of city residents.
The 10th Sustainable Regional Economic Growth Conference has heard that the seachange and treechange trend has had mixed results.
Dr Geoff Cockfield, from the University of Southern Queensland, says city residents moving in with higher incomes and new skills, are now being hit by soaring fuel prices.
"Certainly that's going to limit some thought of commuting great distances," he said.
"On the other hand there is a possible upside to that, because high fuel prices might mean that we don't transport things in, people don't shop out quite as much.

Aquaculture conference delegates descend on Adelaide
Adelaide is hosting the world's largest aquaculture conference over the next three days.
More than 1,000 delegates from around the world are attending Skretting Australasian Aquaculture.
The theme is innovation, advancing and promoting growth within the industry on a global scale.
Tuna, shellfish, kingfish, barramundi, prawns, sea urchins along with marketing and corporate branding are just a smidgen of what is on the agenda.
Aquaculture is the fastest growing food producing sector in the world and provides about 27 per cent of total seafood supply.

Cornish looks to halt SAFF infighting
The South Australian Farmers Federation (SAFF) has appointed a new president as it attempts to stop falling membership levels.
Wayne Cornish, who headed up SAFF between 1995 and 1999, has been returned to the top job.
He has just completed six years as vice president of the National Farmers Federation.
Mr Cornish says he hopes to bring unity to the SAFF, which has been plagued by infighting.
"There has been in recent days too much of a temptation to do our dirty washing in public and that is going to stop," he said.

AWI values benefits to growers at $417m
Peak body Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) says it has delivered $417 million in benefits to woolgrowers over the past three years.
That is according to an independent assessment of the research and development organisation, which has been released as growers prepare to vote on future levy payments.
The report says AWI has established more than 50 direct business relationships to market Australian wool.
Chief executive Len Stephens says those relationships are the future of the sector.
"This week I'll be in Shanghai and Hong Kong with our textile team and we'll be talking to 40 international retailers and showing them what we call our innovation collection for next year," he said.
"In the textile area, I think we've changed our business model to what it was three years ago.
"I'm feeling very confident that that model will work and will produce improved demand for wool over the next couple of years."

Court rejects Gunns claim against activists
An attempt by Tasmanian timber company Gunns Limited to seek damages from 20 environmentalists has been struck out in the Victorian Supreme Court.
Gunns was seeking almost $7 million from the activists.
It was claiming the activists had damaged profits and interfered with contracts by campaigning against the company's logging activities.

US ramps up beef exports to Japan
The United States Agriculture Department says beef exports worth around almost $400 million will be sold to Japan this financial year.
It is a far cry from export levels before the outbreak of mad cow disease in the US.
USDA says beef will slowly move back into the Japanese market, which has been dominated by Australia since the first US mad cow case in 2003.
Economist Monte Vandeveer estimates the US will export close to one-third of its pre-mad cow levels to Japan in fiscal 2007.
"I think we could see in the neighbourhood of maybe $400 million worth of beef exports to Japan in fiscal 2007- less than a third of what we saw in the pre-BSE period," he said.
USDA says that is still about 20 per cent of the Japanese market.

Drought, dollar dent SunRice profits
Another year of drought, the rising Australian dollar and international competition have contributed to a big profit downturn for one of the nation's big food exporters.
SunRice has announced a profit of $5 million, down from $33 million the year before.

Mango growers comfortable with imports decision
The mango industry says it is not concerned by a decision to allow imports from Taiwan into Australia.
Biosecurity Australia has approved an application to import mangoes under strict regulations, including vapour heat treatment of the fruit before they leave Taiwan.
Trevor Dunmall, from the Australian Mango Industry Association, says there will only be a narrow window for the fruit to compete with the homegrown product.
"The Taiwanese season's basically counter-seasonal to the Australian season although there could be some overlap in their season with our early season mangoes," he said.

Western growers experiment with summer crops
While crops in the west are usually grown in the winter months and harvested in the summer months, this year is a bit topsy-turvy.
Some growers are experimenting with summer crops like millet and sorghum to provide more feed for livestock.
Consultant Simon Teakle says seed is relatively cheap and the crops could be a good option for growers struggling through a dry season.
"People have obviously, at the moment, got a shortage of stock feed," he said.
"The type of carrying capacity that forage sorghum and forage millet has is quite large, because of the amount of growth that they get, provided they get sub-soil moisture in there.

Central Qld farmers predict bumper harvest
The wheat harvest has started in central Queensland, where growers are expecting a bumper 500,000 tonne harvest.
The latest forecast from the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics predicts an 11 per cent drop from last year's near-record harvest of 40.5 million tonnes nationwide.
Consultant Pat McKee says it is the first time since the 2000 winter season that central Queensland farmers look like they will have an above-average crop.
"I think that even with the warm finish that the crops, particularly north of Emerald and north of Capella, will be quite good as far as quality is concerned," he said.

Horticulture code delays anger growers
Fruit and vegetable growers are becoming increasingly angry at delays to their promised code of conduct.
Two years ago the Federal Government pledged a mandatory code to improve transparency between growers and wholesalers.
A group of north Queensland growers issued an ultimatum last week in an attempt to force the Government to confirm whether the code will be mandatory or voluntary.
Atherton Tablelands fruit grower Scott Dixson says it is a disgrace that the deadline has passed and they still have not heard from the Government.
"You tell me what other business sends away their total annual production to a third-party not knowing what financial return they will receive and no legal right of documented evidence of what it in fact sold for?" he said.
"The New South Wales Farmers Association have already gone to press over this issue and they have actually accused the Government of holding it up, surely because of the Queensland election."
Queensland Nationals Senator Ron Boswell says he understands growers' frustrations, but he cannot make any promises.

Farmer confidence hits 4-year low: survey
Farmer confidence levels have slumped to a four-year low, according to the latest quarterly survey by Rabobank.
A lack of winter rain has caused farmers in most states to be more pessimistic about their outlook, with the biggest fall in confidence in Western Australia, closely followed by Victoria and South Australia.
Peter Knobblanche says cereal croppers and dairy farmers are the most concerned, followed by beef, sheep, wool and lamb producers.
"It was last this bad in 2002 when we had the big drought then so we're following suit I guess into the dry season again," he said.

New projects to cut Murray River salinity
More projects to reduce salinity in the Murray River will be built under a new $28.5 million project.
The state and federal governments will fund the salt interception schemes.
John Johnson, from the Natural Resource Management Board, says other projects will also benefit.

Survey 'dispels myth' farming harms environment
A wildlife survey in the southern Riverina of New South Wales has found more than 300 unusual and endangered animals living on irrigation properties.
Irrigators instigated the survey across more than 1 million hectares of the Murray River catchment.
Albury-based ecologist Matthew Herring says the findings dispel the perception that farming is bad for the environment.
"There was some really exciting species found like the little gilberts whistler that you get in red gum areas where there's a dense understorey," he said.

Stripe rust found in NSW, SA wheat crops
The fungal disease, stripe rust, has been discovered in wheat crops in northern New South Wales and South Australia for the first time this year.
The highly contagious disease, which can cut crop yields by up to 50 per cent, has been found between Moree and Narrabri, and on the Yorke Peninsual.
Dr Gordon Murray, from the Department of Primary Industries in New South Wales, says the disease could spread.
He says growers with low yields need to decide whether it is worth using fungicides.
"With the generally dry conditions that will tend to slow the amount of stripe rust but it will also mean that the damage it does will be much less," he said.
"Dryland crops are unlikely to benefit from spraying unless we get a turnaround in the season and a lot more rain."
Stripe rust is found on the leaf of wheat plants, in the form of yellow stripes or spores.

High temperatures mark Dowerin field day
An unusually warm day has marked the start of Western Australia's largest field days in the Wheatbelt town of Dowerin.
Today's expected top of around 27 degrees seems to reflect the strange season being endured by many farmers this year.
But as Jane Grieve reports, big crowds are still expected.
"Out of the car window on the way to Dowerin, two hours north east of Perth, crops are patchy and stock feed marginal.
"Machinery sales could be affected this year, with many farmers not anticipating a good harvest.

Traditional owners decry mine expansion approval
Environmental approval has been granted for the expansion of the McArthur River Mine in the Gulf of Carpentaria.
The conversion of the zinc and lead mine to open-cut involves moving the McArthur River five kilometres.
Despite the green light and the promise of a substantial environmental management bond, local traditional owners still oppose the move.
Spokesman Jack Green says talk of local training programs is not enough.
"It's the main river ... we [have] culture and ceremony and sacred site tied up on that river," he said.
"If they're going to change it and that's going to really make us upset, really worried about it.
"It's going to bugger up the song line, the dreaming line you know.
"It's bad enough already."

ATV industry working on safety standards
Motorcycle companies say they are creating a national safety standard for four-wheel all-terrain bikes.
There have been concerns for some years about the number of crashes involving all-terrain vehicles (ATVs).
The New South Wales Coroner is investigating the latest, the death of a 55-year-old rider on a farm on the Monaro in New South Wales.
Yamaha safety lawyer Kelly Stallard says the industry is working on standards, a code of practice, and educating riders.
"The ATV industry is very concerned with occupational health and safety issues," she said.
"We are finalising an industry code of practice for users, particularly farmers, on the safe use of these machines.

Heifer exports may hurt dairy industry: Perkins
With the ongoing dry weather conditions, exports of dairy heifers might help to save farmers.
But one industry leader is worried about the long-term impact on the Australian herd.
Turkey is the latest country to inquire about Australian livestock, as it looks to set up its own breeding herd.
But Michael Perkins, from the Holstien-Fresian Association, says milk companies need to offer farmers better prices, to stop Australia's best livestock disappearing overseas.
"If milk prices do go down like the indication is at the moment - there's a 2 to 5 per cent drop in the commodity price - then we could be looking at a lot of heifers leaving this country," he said.
"That would be sad for the industry long-term.

Farmers to vote on Dairy Australia levy
Dairy farmers will vote for the first time early next year on how much they should pay to peak body Dairy Australia.
Producers currently pay a levy of one-third of a cent per litre to fund research and development, marketing and trade issues.
The levy totals $32 million a year.
Dairy Australia's John McKew says the levy will have to increase just to maintain current work.
"They have to start thinking about it now," he said.
"As their national services body Dairy Australia, how are we going to fund the services that we currently have which are imperative for the industry, but also what are we going to do about the issues which are on our doorstep or on the cusp of it, issues that we need to manage as an industry moving forward?.

Drought blamed for cattle indicator drop
A lack of rain is being blamed for the biggest weekly fall in the Eastern Young Cattle Indicator since April last year.
The indicator of prices from saleyards in the eastern states is considered a guide to general price trends.
It fell 14 cents last week and is hovering around $3.60, compared to $4.00 at the same time last year.
Peter Weeks, from Meat and Livestock Australia, says if it does not rain the market could fall by up to 60 cents a kilo.
"Certainly without widespread rain in the next four to six weeks, I think we will see prices fall back further," he said.
"They will gradually decline moving into late this year and early next year, simply because demand is coming back on export markets and we've got the spring supply about to come on."
In the south-west of Western Australia a surge of dairy herds on to the market has caused the price of cows to fall $150 per head.
With low demand locally, dairy farmers from the east are buying cows, trucking them across the Nullarbor, and still saving between $100 and $200 per head.
Livestock agent Karl Harnett says with more WA farmers leaving the industry, there is a big gap for the eastern states to capitalise on.
"Basically right across the eastern seaboard over the last 12 months there has been a shortage of dairy cattle, especially quality dairy cattle," he said.
"Within in the last six months we've probably seen around 700 to 800 dairy cattle that have moved across the border.

Advertising funds to help stonefruit growers
The Federal Government has announced a one-off $1 million grant to help stonefruit growers who cannot sell fruit to Taiwan this year.
Growers have been locked out of the export market due to new fruit fly protocols.

McGauran leans toward voluntary horticulture code
There are growing signs the horticulture industry will have to be satisfied with a voluntary code of conduct.
The Federal Government originally pledged a mandatory code to give fruit and vegetable producers more negotiating power in the market place.
But Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says a voluntary code is now being given serious consideration, although no final decision has been made.
"One thing we want to avoid by way of a mandatory code is polarisation of the industry," he said.
"You need the whole of supply chain in horticulture working together as we face the pressure of cheap imports and a voluntary code of conduct may very well serve to bring industry closer together for mutual benefit.

AWB plays down Cole inquiry to growers
Wheat exporter AWB has told Victorian grain growers it does not think the Cole inquiry into allegations of sanction-breaking kickbacks will present any problems for the company.
AWB's Brendan Stewart and Ian Donges have also told a grain growers' meeting in Melbourne that they believe the company will be in a position to rebuild after the inquiry.
The Victorian Farmers Federation grains group president, Ian Hastings, says he believes AWB has asked for similar meetings with farmer groups in other states.
"Brendan Stewart spoke about how the Cole inquiry was progressing and the fact that AWB still were clearly of the belief that they have not really done anything wrong," he said.
"They expect at the end of the Cole inquiry that [they] should be able to start and rebuild the company.
"They don't believe that they have actually broken any laws so I guess we all need to wait and see."
AWB spokesman Peter McBride says the company does not want to make any public statement pre-empting the outcome of the Cole inquiry.

Clean Seas eyes onshore tuna breeding success
South Australian company Clean Seas believes it might be only a year away from becoming the first to crack the secret of breeding tuna onshore.
The problem lies in trying to replicate breeding conditions in the wild, where tuna travel vast distances to find warm water to spawn.
Marine biotechnologist Abigail Elizur says the company is drawing on knowledge from around the world to try to speed up the process.
"I hope that by the end of the year or the start or the beginning of 2007 we will already have spawning and we certainly will try and apply all the previous knowledge," she said.

Isolated growers ship fruit to Europe
Mango growers in Katherine and Kununurra in far north Western Australia are setting up a company to sell fruit directly to European markets.
Trials of sending fruit to Europe via sea freight have until now been heavily financed by government and industry.
The success of those trials has led to the new venture.
Executive officer Jill Parker is confident it will work, despite difficult market conditions in recent years.
"Not a lot of prospects on exports for this area other than getting this sea freight to work," she said.
"It's been difficult for them to be able to justify to spending this sort of money that's needed to to get this off the ground.

Bull sale may have set records
Livestock agents believe a charolais bull sale in southern Queensland has set an Australian record.
Despite the drought, 188 palgrove bulls sold for an average of $11,412 each this week.
It is the highest average price for a single vendor, on-property sale.

Animals continue to feel cyclone's impact
Native and feral animals are showing up on farms looking for food more than five months after cyclone Larry crossed the north Queensland coast.
The cyclone damaged 15,000 homes, disrupted farming and devastated bushland.
Atherton Tablelands dairy farmer James Geraghty says he has never seen such an explosion of wildlife.
"A mate's got cassowaries coming onto his lawn," he said.
"There's a six-metre python living in a bloke's house in Cairns because he's got nowhere to live in the scrub.
"Pigs and dogs we haven't seen the numbers of what you call feral animals outside the scrub for a long long time.

Animal welfare kit well-received: Dairy Australia
Dairy Australia says its efforts to address animal welfare have been well-received.
The peak body has worked with the RSPCA and Animals Australia to develop an animal welfare kit.
Spokeswoman Brigid Peachey says the kit discusses contentious issues, including the handling of bobby calves, dehorning and tail docking.
"What the kit's about is to let farmers know that they're doing on farm is already good animal welfare in terms of on-farm husbandry," she said.
"What we are hoping it's doing is giving them the words to go out there, and talk to people about animal welfare and what they are doing in terms of just their good on farm practices.

Cattle Council, RSPCA talk welfare
In a new approach to addressing animal welfare issues, the Cattle Council has held talks with the RSPCA for the first time.
The meeting is part of an animal welfare roundtable at the Cattle Council's executive meeting in Hobart.
President Bill Bray says the livestock industry can improve its image by working with groups which are trusted by the public.
"RSPCA does have that respect, they have some views that are contrary to ours but we have to engage them and we have to get smarter at how we engage them and engage the community," he said.

SA wool growers oppose AWI levy increase
Wool growers in southern South Australia say they will not support a push to increase the levy they pay to the peak body, Australian Wool Innovation (AWI).
A report released this week says AWI has returned $417 million in benefits to the wool industry.
But growers say they will not vote to increase the levy above the current rate of 2 per cent in this year's wool poll.
Tony Hedges, from Keith, does not think growers should pay anything.
"What have they done for us?" he said.
"What they're doing now is the repeat of what they did 20 years ago, and what happened 20 years ago was the repeat of what they did 20 years before.
"I don't think they need any more money, I think they squander what money they've got there now.
"They've had their chances and they've blown it, I think."
Trevor Little, from Kongorong, says growers have seen little output from the AWI.
"The money that's been achieved over the years, and many years of the levy on the wool has not really in the last 10 years achieved anything," he said.
Malcolm McDonald, from Willalooka Pastoral Company, added: "I don't think, from a promotional point of view, that it's been spent wisely.

Woolgrowers revise PETA case claim
There has been a new development in the ongoing Federal Court case between Australian Wool Innovation (AWI) and animal rights group PETA.
The 103 woolgrowers supporting the action will now no longer allege that they have suffered a direct economic loss as a result of a PETA campaign.
The case centres on allegations that PETA's actions have reduced sales of wool by spreading negative publicity and misinformation about the wool industry and the practice of mulesing.
Les Targ, from AWI, says the growers are still involved in other parts of the class action.
"What is happening is that those 103 woolgrowers are no longer claiming direct economic loss because of the difficulties of proving that," he said.
"You've got to remember that they say goodbye to their wool at the farm gate and there's about six different owners between them and the retailer that sells the finished product.

NLIS poll hacking probe continues
An independent review into tampering with an Internet poll on the National Livestock Identification System (NLIS) is expected within the next week.
Meat and Livestock Australia says the report by Ernst and Young is taking longer than expected because of the depth and breadth of the review.

Audits find mutton labelled as lamb
Three abattoirs have been told to clean up their act, after being caught processing mutton as lamb.
The industry watchdog AusMeat uncovered the breaches in Victoria and New South Wales during regular audits.
The authority cannot confirm how much meat headed for the domestic market has been wrongly labelled.
Chief executive Ian King now wants all animals assessed before processing, instead of the current 10 per cent sample.
"Back in 1991 there was actually a standard under an AusMeat advice that actually required all ovine animals to be assessed," he said.

AWB secret clause may cost growers
The wheat export regulator has confirmed that growers could face losses, because of a confidential clause in a contract between the corporate and export arms of AWB.
If the grain handler loses its export monopoly after the oil-for-food Inquiry, AWB Limited could claim damages from the national wheat pool.
The pool is run by AWB International and pays growers for their grain.
The Wheat Export Authority says it has a number of concerns about the contract, which is now being re-negotiated as part of an AWB restructure.
But AWB International chairman Ian Donges denies damages could run to tens of millions of dollars.
"It's a three-year agreement so if you break the agreement in the first year it would be greater than in the last year of the agreement but we are only talking in the end of the day many small numbers of millions of dollars if anything," he said.
"There has been no problems between the two companies in terms of the way this contract has been performing - at AWB International, we have been extremely pleased with the performance of AWB Limited.
"Speculation there is going to be a break in the contract is purely that."
Mr Donges' comments have not reassured the Grains Council of Australia.
Chairman Murray Jones says growers should not be paying for the fee at all and wants AWB to make the service agreement public immediately.
"There shouldn't be a fee that goes back to growers for a separation fee and if there is a break fee then we really need to know what it is," he said.
"We are really calling on AWB to tell us what the service agreement contains, tell us what the break fees may be and any liabilities that the growers may take on."

Former AWB executive disputes colleague's evidence
A former AWB executive has denied to the Cole inquiry that he hatched a plan with the Iraqi Grains Board in October 2000 to set up a scheme through which trucking fees would be paid.
AWB's former general manager for marketing, Charles Stott, has told the hearing he rejects evidence given last week by his former colleague, Dominic Hogan.
Senior counsel assisting the inquiry, John Agius QC, went straight to an October 2000 series of handwritten notes and letters involving a meeting with Mr Hogan, Mr Stott and the Iraqi Minister for Trade.
Mr Stott refuted Mr Hogan's claim that he had anything to do with the establishment of an incentives scheme through which trucking fees would be paid.
Mr Agius then asked Mr Stott if he was suggesting that Mr Hogan's notes were made up.
Mr Stott then replied: "I have absolutely no idea.
"I don't know where they were drafted, I'm not even sure he took notes."

Victorian ram takes out Supreme Merino title
A superfine ram from Victoria has taken out one of the wool industry's most prestigious awards.
Champion rams from five states competed for the Supreme Merino Ram title last night at the National Merino Sheep Show at Dubbo in central western New South Wales.
The ram Rockbank Dozer, from the Rockbank Stud at Dunkeld in Victoria's west, was named the best.
"He's 16 micron and he's a very large ram for that quality - he's 130 kilos," stud principal John Crawford said.

Wheat grower wins young farmer title
A Western Australian wheat grower has been named National Young Farmer of the Year.
Mogumber's Cameron Williams, 27, won the public speaking, agronomy and fencing modules of the competition.
He says it was tough job beating the 14 other finalists.
"The other guys from the other states were really good quality and had a lot of skills and had different experiences to me," he said.
"But certainly the day was just a lot of fun, a real learning experience.

Retailers question winemakers' environmental credentials
Australian winemakers are being told they need to show they are clean and green, with a growing number of overseas retailers asking about the environmental credentials of their suppliers.
Seventy per cent of the nation's wine grape crush is already signed up to a stewardship program which documents good environmental practices.
Amy Russell, from the Winemakers Federation, says retailers in the United Kingdom in particular are concerned about water use, waste and greenhouse gas emissions.
"There's certainly increasing pressure out there from non-government organisations and even from some retailers to actually prove any claims that you may have," she said.
"We do have that inherent position of being clean and green and it's not just in the wine industry it's in many industries.

SA bushfire season may start early
South Australia's bushfire season could be brought forward because of the threat posed by the predicted hot dry summer.
Deputy chief officer Andrew Lawson, from the Country Fire Service, says the lack of winter rain has also raised the fire threat.
The state's bushfire season usually starts on the Eyre Peninsula on November 1.
But Mr Lawson says but it could begin weeks earlier.
"We're very concerned about the lack of rain over winter and that will lead to the forest fuels being drier a lot earlier," he said.

Sunbeam Foods back in the black
Australia's biggest dried fruit processing company has recorded a big turnaround, posting a $7 million profit before tax.
Sunbeam Foods, in Victoria's north-west, also runs a citrus packing shed and juice business.
The company has reduced its debt by $30 million by selling assets, reducing stock and better managing cash.
Chief executive Richard Findlay says the result is an improvement on last year's $700,000 loss but it is still unsatisfactory.

Mango growers expect bumper harvest
The Australian mango harvest has begun, with picking under way at Pine Creek in the Northern Territory.
Early indications suggest a bumper crop but despite the amount of fruit, growers are still hopeful of strong prices.
Michelle Hill, who manages the Pine Creek Plantation, says cyclone Larry's impact on banana prices could have a positive spin-off for mangoes.
"We've been paying a lot of money for bananas over the last sort of six months so I think that the mangoes will come in and people will go, 'Oh gee these are not so expensive'," she said.

Q-fever case prompts push to relocate abattoir
A push has begun to relocate a Victorian abattoir after links were made to four cases of the disease Q-fever.
The Wodonga meatworks is located within the Wodonga city boundary.
The local council has now announced a feasibility study into moving it to a location well away from populated areas.
Last month the Victorian Department of Human Services revealed four people in Wodonga had Q-fever.
