Transporters, who face hundreds of thousands of dollars in operational costs, were not included in the Federal Government's recent $700 million drought package.
President of the Livestock Transporter's Association Mark Sullivan says while operators have been kept busy carting thousands of drought affected sheep and cattle, that will soon slow down as stock numbers dwindle.
"I was speaking to a couple of Victorian members, they reckon their workload is fairly hectic, but what they're worried about is when it comes [during] January and February, when the impact of it happens, what they're going to do next," he said.

ACT officially in drought
The ACT has been drought-declared, giving 90 farmers access to federal and local government assistance.
As part of the package, rates will not have to be paid and rural lease payments will be deferred.
The ACT Government also plans to give farmers transport subsidies, in line with New South Wales.
Grazier Tony Griffin says he would normally be able to cut enough silage for next winter, but not this year.
"I've got five semi-loads of hay starting today actually," he said.
"We're getting it from western NSW, it's really failed wheat crops."
Meanwhile Australia's drought and its human toll are getting a lot of attention in the United States.
US agriculture officials are watching the Australian drought disaster closely and not just its impact on US wheat prospects, but its toll on lives.
From a USDA reporter: "A farmer suicide every four days ... that's what's happening in Australia right now, according to a mental health group there."
And USDA meteorologist Harlan Shannon says a developing El Nino could mean more hot, dry weather for Australian grain and livestock.
"It's not going to be good for Australian farmers, at least, historically speaking, it hasn't been, And so, if it does continue to intensify, the road ahead doesn't look too good," he said.

Cyclone recovery work boosts local economy: economist
There are claims today that north Queensland's economy will end up $400 million better off because of cyclones Larry and Monica.
Cyclone damage has been estimated at around $500 million while insurance payouts and government assistance are said to total up to 900 million.
Cairns economist Bill Cummings says the recovery work has also boosted the economy.

Vine heating may eliminate frost damage
An Australian physicist says frost damage in vineyards could be eliminated if vines themselves were heated.
Most frost prevention measures concentrate on heating the air around the vines to stop frost forming.
The University of New England is researching whether electric cables can be trailed around vines to heat them by one or two degrees, to prevent grape buds from freezing.
Associate Professor Dr David Lamb says the system first appeared in France, but has never been tried in Australia.

Land rights anniversary commemorated
The anniversary of land rights in South Australia has been commemorated in the state's far north-west.
The Pitjantjatjara people were given freehold title to 103 square kilometres under an agreement with the State Government in 1981.
It was the first deal of its type in Australia.
State Aboriginal Affairs Minister Jay Weatherill say the anniversary comes at a time when governments need to rethink their approach to Aboriginal communities.
"This is the first place in Australia that gave freehold title to a community so it's a very important occasion," he said.

Imported feed grain expected to ease shortages
The Federal Government expects the first imports of feed grain for livestock to arrive in Australia in January to ease looming shortages.
More than 40 import applications are being assessed from companies wanting to fill shortfalls caused by the drought.
Biosecurity Australia officers are making the first assessments of wheat, maize and sorghum in the UK, Canada and the UK.
But Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says the imports are not likely to make a major difference in prices.
"It's a question of balance that we have a million cattle in feedlots at present and of course the dairy, pig meat and chicken industries are terribly dependent on grain," he said.
"So for those who are able to produce grain we don't want to suppress their price and in any event I don't think the amounts being able to be imported will amount to a flood."
Meanwhile the drought has forced South Australian grain marketing company ABB to accept poorer quality grain.
The company has reduced its screenings for malt barley and will accept smaller and less plump grain.
ABB's Lyndon Asser says the move will benefit growers as the company tries to secure more supply.

Organised crime targeted by fishing Bill
Organised crime in the fishing industry will be targeted by tough new penalties if the State Government's Fisheries Management Bill becomes law. A recent study by the Australian Institute of Criminology has revealed organised criminal activity in the industry with syndicates operating across state boundaries. South Australia's director of Fisheries Will Zacharin says this is one of the reasons why tougher penalties for illegal fishing have been included in the Bill which was introduced to Parliament last week. Mr Zacharin says it also includes a demerit points system for commercial licence holders.

Locusts took department "by surprise"
The director of agriculture Don Plowman says there is little his department could have done to stop the damage caused by locusts to crops grown in the Coorabie district of the far west. And he says the explosion of locust hatchings took both Primary Industries SA and local growers by by surprise. Mr Plowman was responding to criticism by grain growers in the Coorabie district who say they didn't get practical help from the department to stop the pests damaging their crops. He says the department will monitor the situation over summer and autumn.Strong gains for wool
The best price rises for wool in two years were achieved at last week's national wool sales, Elders wool manager Mark Rodda reported. He says this reflects concern by overseas buyers that Australia's drought will reduce supply and they will not be able to secure the wool they need. Mr Rodda says the best increases were in the medium to broad wools. Nineteen micron wools jumped 27cents/kilogram to finish at 953c/kg clean; 21m were up 51c to 815c/kg; 22m increased by 57c to 787c and the 23m rose 49c to 756c.

Farmers to bear higher feed costs
The drought is expected to push up food prices with fewer crops and more expensive water.
But consumers will not be the only ones bearing the increased costs.
Market vegetable prices to consumers are expected to rise by at least 30 per cent but many growers are locked into fixed contracts with processors.
In some states dairy farmers have contracted prices or are paid based on world prices and so will have to bear some of the the higher costs of cattle feed themselves.
Chicken meat is expected to rise by about 15 per cent, but although red meat prices will rise in the long term, initially price fluctuations are expected to be absorbed by retailers.
Breakfast cereals will rise.

Govt urged to take control over vegetable imports
Unions in Tasmania are calling for the Federal Government to take greater control over vegetable imports to save Australia's processing industry.
About 10 jobs are expected to be lost at a McCain Foods' plant in north-west Tasmania because of a loss of sales.
Anne Urquart from the Manufacturing Workers Union says imports, a rise in home brands and a lack of country-of-origin labelling is putting processors under pressure.
"I'm really concerned since it's only 12 months since the farmers had a very large rally that identified the concern about not only the labelling but the actual importing of frozen vegetables," she said.

US company tests South Korean import protocols
A shipment of US beef has arrived in South Korea for the first time in nearly three years but exporters appear nervous about the future of the market.
The US Agriculture Department says the consignment is from a company testing new import protocols designed to minimise the risk of mad cow disease.
But other companies are waiting to see how it is received in a market now dominated by Australia.
US Department of Agriculture Deputy Undersecretary Chuck Lambert says despite Korea's market reopening to US boneless beef on September 11 after a 2003 mad cow case, the US industry remains reluctant to ship, even though one US firm shipped nine tonnes this week.
"The reluctance to ship has been by the US industry, related to concerns about how Korea might handle findings of small pieces of bone, or bone chips. We have had one company who has elected to test the system," he said.
Mr Lambert is still waiting on Seoul for a response to his letter, asking the Koreans for more flexibility in how they deal with bone chips, cartilage and muscle membrane.
Korea's major retailers are not placing orders for the U-S beef.
Quarantine authorities will take the next 10 days to inspect the first shipment for bone fragments.
But Meat and Livestock Australia's regional manager in Korea Glen Feist says Korean retail chains are not yet ready to welcome back US product.
"Obviously over the last nearly three years now we've made very strong relationships with these guys and they're all indicating to us that they'll take a wait and see attitude as well," he said.

Natural gas sector pushes for role in greenhouse gas fight
Australia's natural gas sector wants to know why it is not playing a greater role in the push to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The Federal Government is funding two research projects in Queensland to extract methane from coal, with any carbon dioxide emissions to be buried underground.
But the Australian Pipeline Industry Association has questioned the continued reliance on coal while renewable energy sources come on line.
Chief executive Cheryl Cartwright says there is enough known natural gas reserves in Australia to last 100 years and it would make better environmental sense to start using it.
"Instead of relying on coal fired generation in the immediate term and the medium term, we can start to reduce greenhouse gas emissions," she said.
"Certainly not to the level that renewable energy provides, which is almost zero but natural gas greenhouse emissions in energy generation are far lower than coal."
Federal Resources Minister Ian Macfarlane says coal will remain a feature of global energy generation for the next century.
Mr Macfarlane says Australia is leading the research into cleaner burning and emission technologies, and the natural gas sector should see itself as a part of that.
"They're promoting their side of the industry, the Government is promoting a broad mix, we need to make sure as we announce that mix we get it right," he said.

Senate committee hears grain growers' concerns
The Wheat Export Authority says it has not yet held talks with the Federal Government about increased powers to regulate wheat exports.
Officers have told the Senate estimates agriculture committee that they expect the authority's role to change in the wake of the Cole inquiry.
But committee chairman, Liberal Senator Bill Heffernan has told the hearing that concern among growers over low pool payments and AWB's service agreement, mean there is pressure to change the system.
"It's as if you've discovered a betrayal, a sense of betrayal, amongst a lot of wheat growers and to get the sense of betrayal, they say a picture paints a thousand words," he said.

Scientists want extra funding for CO2 storage projects
Australian scientists are calling on the Federal Government to double its funding for projects which store carbon dioxide underground.
The federal and state governments have announced a $2 billion low emission technology fund to help reduce emissions from coal, oil and gas mining.
Peter Cook from the CRC for Greenhouse Gas Technologies is helping to design Australia's first project to store carbon dioxide in Victoria's Otway Basin.
He says the funding is not enough.
"Almost half of Australia's total emissions come from what we call stationary sources, in other words from power stations," he said.

Irrigation pumping on unregulated streams stopped
The drought has forced an early halt to irrigation pumping on unregulated streams and rivers in New South Wales.
The Department of Natural Resources says it is unprecedented to see water levels fall so low in so many river systems this early in the season.
Water levels have reached precarious levels in southern, northern and far western regions, while in the central west pumping is expected to be halted within days.
Spokesman David Harris says he has never seen so many creeks and rivers drying up so early.
"This year is just horrendous, we've just had no winter flow, we've had no spring flow and as a consequence most of the unregulated streams have just stopped flowing," he said.

Drought aid assistance increased
The New South Wales Government has announced further drought assistance for farmers and irrigators.
The extra assistance will see drought aid increased to $30 million this financial year.
Irrigators in the Lachlan Valley will be the biggest winner from the announcement, with their fixed water charges waived this season, saving them around $5 million.
The State Government has also extended its drought support workers program until June next year.
The Premier has waived the wild dog destruction board fees for farmers in the western division and deferred the pest insect levy for this financial year.
NSW Premier Morris Iemma says they are also increasing mental health services.
"There is a real human toll here. Extra stress, anxiety, indeed depression as farming families suffer as a result of losing their income," he said.

NT cattle exports to Malaysia almost double
Almost twice as many cattle are being exported from the Northern Territory to the Malaysian state of Sabah compared to last year.
Almost 2,500 cattle have been sent out of the port of Darwin this year and the trade is expected to keep growing.
Stuart Kenny from the NT Cattlemen's Association has been at the opening a new Meat Technology Centre in Sabah, which he says will help to build the export business.
"We are presently about 30 kilometres north of the main city in Sabah, which has seen a collaborative agreement between Sabah Government and also the NT Government," he said.
"What we are seeing today is a first class facility that can meet the technology and the quality of meat that can be seen anywhere in Australia.

Bull sells for record price
The record price for an Australian stud bull has been doubled at a brahman bull sale near Rockhampton.
A 20-month-old bull sold for $300,000 at the McCamley families' Tartrus Lancefield sale.
It was bought by Graham Kemp from the Happy Valley Brahman stud at Mackay.
Spokesman Ken McCaffrey hopes other sons of the bull, JDH Baxter Manso, are as popular.
"They sold particularly well the sons of Baxter's through the sale but he was well credentialled in every way with pedigree and his group breed plan figures," Mr McCaffrey said.

Labor hits out at pay rise for GRDC boss
The Federal Government-funded Grains Research and Development Corporation (GRDC) is under fire, for awarding its managing director a $60,000 pay rise during the drought.
The GRDC has admitted to a Senate estimates hearings that managing director Peter Reading's salary was increased to $460,000 this year, but says it was after a salary review by an independent body.
Labor's agriculture spokesman Gavan O'Connor says the Government should be ashamed.
"I think it's important that some sensitivity in judgment is exercised when wage rises or salary rises of this kind are granted," he said.

Grain growers urged not to accept low shares offer
The Victorian Farmers Federation (VFF) is warning grain growers not to accept low offers for their shares in wheat exporter AWB.
The Australian Share Purchasing Corporation is offering drought-hit farmers $1.50 for their B class shares.
Ian Hastings from the VFF is worried that growers do not realise their shares are worth almost twice that amount.

Grain harvest under way
The grain harvest has commenced in Victoria's Mallee and some grain growers say they are surprised by yields.
With less than 100 millimetres of rain during the growing season, farmers have been expecting a small harvest.
In the Millewa, in the state's north-west, farmer Colin Hunt says some wheat crops are yielding up to one tonne per hectare, a bit above expectation.

Canola crushers look to import crop
The canola crop has now all but failed this season in New South Wales.
Canola crushers are currently looking at importing canola from Western Australia or Canada to meet the state's domestic demand.
Pete MacSmith from Macsmith Milling in the state's central west says the local figures are not good.
"The latest estimates are putting the NSW crop at somewhere between 25 and 35,000 tonnes," he said.
"There's been a few reasonable crops up in the north.
"There will be very little harvested in the central west until we get down to the irrigation areas.

Drought impacts on northern cattle prices
Cattle prices in tropical northern Australia are feeling the impact of the dry conditions elsewhere.
An oversupply of stock to the domestic markets is driving down prices across the nation and for the live export trade.
Steve Ellison, of the Territory's Live Exporters Association, says cattle prices have eased by 10 to 15 cents for every kilogram sold.
However he says there has been a big improvement in the buffalo export trade.
"I think price is a big factor, plus there are buffalo operators who are really well organised, they can get much bigger numbers on a regular basis and put them in yards and quieten them down prior to going on the ship," he said.

Quarantined US beef released in Japan
Customs officials in Japan have finally released 910 tonnes of US beef which has been in quarantine since January.
The shipment was delayed when Japan reimposed a ban on US imports.
Meat and Livestock Australia's Glen Feist says the problem now is that the beef only has an eight week shelf life.
"The Japanese consumer is extremely discerning when it comes to quality and freshness of any meat," he said.
"If consumer sentiment obviously is down over there against US beef a food service operator might buy this product and not be able to push it through either.

Sawmillers worried about long-term viability
Tasmanian sawmillers are concerned that a downturn in the wood chip market could undermine their long-term viability.
Forestry Tasmania's annual report has revealed a 24 per cent fall in wood chip sales, and a 9 per cent reduction in sawlogs.
Fred Ralph from the Country Sawmillers Federation blames the drop in saw log sales to the slow down in the construction of new homes.
But he is concerned that when the industry recovers, mills will not be able to sell their wood chip residues.

SA and NSW govts reach water trading agreement
The South Australian and New South Wales governments have signed an agreement to allow cross-border trading of water entitlements from the Murray and Murrumbidgee Rivers.
Earlier this year the Federal Government threatened to fine the two states $17 million if they did not reach an agreement by January.
South Australian Minister for the River Murray Karlene Maywald is hopeful this deal will avoid any penalties.
"We've come a long way since earlier this year in relation to the negotiations and the discussion," she said.

Commission proposes increasing semi-trailer loads
Load limits for semi-trailers could be increased by five tonnes under a draft proposal from the National Transport Commission.
Trucks with twin-steer axles would be able to carry a maximum gross weight of 47.5 tonnes.
The commission says any additional damage to roads would be offset by higher registration charges.
Spokesman Paul Sullivan says the plan would result in productivity and safety gains for the logging, mining and construction industries.
"It originally came from requests from industry in the logging, mining and construction industries that need to carry a little bit of extra mass," he said.

Aboriginal land subdivided for farming
In a first for the Northern Territory, Aboriginal land has been subdivided for horticulture development.
It has taken more than 10 years to develop the new leases due to a lack of funding.
Five blocks of between 100 to 1,000 hectares at Ti-Tree, north of Alice Springs, will be leased to farmers for development.
Allan Cooney from Centrefarm says the plan will increase the productivity of unimproved land, with plans to grow olives, mangoes, tablegrapes and bush tucker.
"We would expect there to be fruit planted here next year, albeit on a relatively small scale but within a couple of years we'll see extensive plantings in these areas," he said.
"We've got people that have been lined up for years ready to go onto these sites.

Farm hoping for canker-free future
Orchardists at Emerald in central Queensland are in the final stages of preparing for what is being called the most complex tree planting operation in Australia's history.
A total of 193,000 citrus trees had to be destroyed at 2PH farms after canker was discovered in the region in 2004.
Under a replacement project 5,000 trees will be planted every day for four months.
Manager Craig Pressler is hoping for a canker-free future.

Eco City Farm wins invention of year award
An urban food production system designed to reduce carbon emissions has won an invention of the year award in northern New South Wales.
The Eco City Farm, which is on a standard house block, produces enough fish and vegetables to feed 300 families.
The farm is designed to cut the emissions created by transporting food from rural areas to city consumers.
Spokesman Andrew Bodlovich says it produces no effluent, recycles its own water and is economically viable even at current city land values.
"We really started out with the specific goal of achieving a triple bottom line with an agriculture system, so it really needed to work for profit but we also wanted it to be very ecological and it had to work for people as well," he said.

Muster slows cane toads' progress
More than 48,000 cane toads have been caught in the Timber Creek region of the Northern Territory.
A month-long campaign has been running in an attempt to stop the poisonous pest crossing the Western Australian border.
Coordinator Graeme Sawyer originally expected to catch around 10,000 but he is hopeful the Great Toad Muster has slowed the toad's progress.

Rebound in wool prices expected to continue
Wool prices are tipped to rise even further as competition for Australia's drought-depleted wool stocks grows between Europe and Asia.
Wools in the medium 21 to 23 micron range are at a five year high after jumping up to 44 cents a kilogram at yesterday's sales.
Over the past three weeks the benchmark eastern market indicator has risen to a two-year-high.
Chief economist at Woolmark Chris Wilcos says the rebound should continue for at least another two months.
"We would expect to see a further rise of 10 to 15 per cent again, compared with what we've already seen in the last three weeks," he said.

Mixed response to water buying scheme
There has been a mixed response to the launch of the Federal Government's first scheme to buy water from farmers for the environment.
The Government is offering to buy water from irrigators in the Southern Murray Darling Basin that is saved through on and off farm efficiency improvements.
Some irrigators say it will offer farmers a new source of income.
But Danny Lee from the Victorian Irrigators Council says with little irrigation water available, governments should be spending more money on water saving infrastructure.
"Right now we have a severe drought, nobody needs to be told that, farmers are on their knees, they are in a weakened state," he said.

Complaint delays animal ID system audit
There has been a six-week delay in an audit of Australia's new electronic animal identification system.
The audit was commissioned in July to investigate claims of inaccuracies and systemic errors in the system's database.
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says an official complaint last month about the process has caused delays.
Meanwhile one of Australia's biggest cattle producers has been fined for failing to electronically ear-tag his cattle.
Despite pleading guilty, the central Queensland-based Laglan Pastoral Company has hit back at the prosecution, saying ear-tags were not available.
The company was charged with breaching Queensland's new national livestock identification laws by trucking cattle between company properties without the ear-tags, which are designed to trace animals from paddock to plate.
Spokesman Charles Lund believes the $800 fine and conviction is unfair
"The meatworks will tell you over 30 years we've never had a question come back from them and our cattlework and our paperwork's been always spot on and they couldn't find anything wrong with any of our paperwork or the traceability of our stock," he said.
"What annoys me the most, that we've helped the DPI, we've helped the police, we've caught quite a lot of stolen cattle and that, and we're all for cattle being correctly designated, but if you can't get a product to put in them in the ear, you can't put it in the ear."

Canadian GM canola may be in Aust by year's end
Genetically-modified (GM) canola from Canada could be imported into Australia by the end of the year.
It is one of 40 applications to import grain and oilseeds to address feed shortages.
Peter Liehne from the Australian Quarantine Service has told the Senate Estimates Agriculture Committee that if the canola application succeeds, the oilseed will have to be crushed near the port of entry.
He says the applicant plans to make the remaining meal into livestock feed.

AWI court action costing woolgrowers
The Federal Court has heard the Australian Wool Innovation's legal action against the animal rights group, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), has cost woolgrowers $5 million.
The two-year-old case is a result of PETA's campaign against mulesing.
But at today's hearing in Sydney, Justice Rares has asked how woolgrowers can claim indirect economic losses, when AWI has $100 million in the bank.
The startling figures came out after PETA filed a strike-out motion against the woolgrowers' damages.
Rod Smith SC told Justice Rares AWI and its co-applicants had made a series of "forensic u-turns".
Mr Smith said he was intrigued to know how the 101 woolgrowers could prove they had suffered a loss of benefit in their levy when AWI had $100 million in its accounts last financial year.
Mr Smith added the 2 per cent levy was a Commonwealth statutory figure determined in November 2003 before the court action began.
Mr Bannon SC for AWI and the woolgrowers argued the strike-out motion was a shemozzle, saying if AWI had spent its legal fees in the PETA campaign on other things woolgrowers would be in a better position today.
Justice Rares ordered that AWI and the woolgrowers provide within seven days detailed particulars of the loss.

City residents rally around drought-stricken counterparts
Charities say there is growing support from city people wanting to help rural Australia through the drought.
Queensland-based Aussie Helpers says people and businesses from all along the east coast have offered free holiday accommodation, while some Brisbane residents have driven into outback Queensland to donate groceries.
Beverly Kerr from St Vincent de Paul has started a rural task force to coordinate support in the ACT and New South Wales and says she only realised how bad it was when she visited rural Australia.
"When I was asked to form this task force I thought what am I going to do, I don't know anything about this drought, I live in Wollongong near the beach," she said.
"So I drove to Broken Hill for their 100th anniversary, instead of flying I drove.
"You can read it in the paper and you can think 'oh that's really bad' but actually seeing it and talking to people.
"I mean some people on those farms have been there for generations and generations, what do they do?"
Meanwhile farm workers are urging their bosses to be honest about the future of their jobs during the drought.
Victorian dairy farm worker Nat Watson says employees who are kept in the dark can become anxious about their job security.
"They're coming home stressed and its affecting their family life because they don't know if there is going to be on food on the table tomorrow," he said.

Record October temps recorded in NSW
New South Wales has recorded its hottest, driest October on record, following its hottest and driest September.
The consequences have been devastating for the rural sector, with crop failures and feed, and water shortages forcing a huge sell off of stock.
Mike Logan from the Bureau of Meteorology has the bad news.
"Right across NSW temperatures were just more than three degrees above the historical average of 24.5 degrees and the rainfall's unbelievably low," he said.
"On average we only received 6.6 mm compared to the state average for October of 48.9.

Price rise to help potato growers
Tasmanian potato growers have received their first price rise in six years.
Processor McCain will pay growers $10 a tonne more for russet burbank varieties and $6 a tonne extra for other varieties.
Grower representative Phillip Beswick says the rise will help farmers facing a difficult season ahead.
"It's pretty significant, the company has recognised the hardship growers are going to be in this year with the problems with water and acquiring it, and the high costs that we've had in the last 12 months," he said.

Robotic system to hasten grape vines pruning
University students in Adelaide have a designed a robotic system which can hand prune grape vines four times faster than a human.
Although many grapes are mechanically pruned, premium varieties still need some hand pruning.
Through GPS and computer imaging, the software can be programed to tell a machine with a mechanical arm, where and at what angles to make the cuts.
One of the designers, Damien Mavroudis, says it has the potential to save growers time and money.

Harvesting short crops challenges grain growers
Grain growers in Western Australia struggling with the dry season are now facing with another challenge, harvesting short crops.
Glen Riethmuller from the Department of Agriculture says farmers in the reliable cropping areas are not used to having such light crops.
He says growers are experimenting with different ways to set up their harvesters, so they can reduce losses.
"People have certainly been looking at that knife and particularly changing to the double density knife guards if they haven't already got them," he said.

Rain dance invoked for drought relief
In an effort to break the drought, a woman in South Australia who describes herself as an Aboriginal spiritual adviser, is planning to travel the country hosting rain dances.
Inspired by a rain dance staged in the Victorian town of Ouyen in 2003, Angelina Harradine says she will help to organise community ceremonies.
"Myself and my team will travel all over Australia," she said.
"There are processes that are used, those processes are very sacred, they're shared with people with respect.
"I don't sit down here and think this is all fun and games.

Young Aboriginal actor sought for outback epic
The search is continuing for a young Aboriginal actor to star in a major outback motion picture.
Director Baz Luhrmann's sweeping romance and historical epic will star Nicole Kidman and Hugh Jackman.
Filming on the yet unnamed film is due to begin early next year across Top End station country and he says time is running out to find the third character.
"Now what brings them together though is this child and there an Aboriginal boy between the ages of eight and 10," Luhrmann said.
"He's a very, very primary character and in fact right at the moment, that's my biggest focus.
"We are looking all over Australia for this young Indigenous actor and we have seen some great boys so far, so we have got great possibilities.

Frost hits apple crop
A quarter of the apple crop in central western New South Wales has been lost, as a result of weekend frosts.
The cold snap hit the Orange region, damaging apples, apricots and cherries.
Batlow producers have also lost around 5 per cent of their crop.
Orange district apple grower Adam Roweth says he lost about half his crop, when the temperature plummeted to minus two.
"I thought I had a problem in one of the blocks," he said.
"The fruit wasn't seen to be growing, but it wasn't because it wasn't growing, it was because it was frosted.
"I have never seen frost that way, in that condition and that bad in my time which isn't very old but I can assure you that I don't think my father would have seen it like that either.

AWB cuts wheat pool management costs
Wheat exporter AWB has slashed its costs for managing the national wheat pool this financial year.
The company says it is an attempt to maximise returns to grain growers during the drought and reduce administrative costs.
The base fee AWB charges for managing the pool will be cut by 40 per cent to $39.5 million.
Chairman of AWB International Ian Donges says the new business model will benefit growers.
"It means the cost per tonne will come under $10, providing we get four million tonnes," he said.
"I think that's a very good result given that in the last drought in 2002 that $10 per tonnes was around about the base rate that growers paid as well.

Govt considers drought aid for rural businesses
The Deputy Prime Minister says the Federal Government is now considering extending drought assistance to farm-dependent businesses.
Rural businesses say they have been hit just as hard by the drought and cannot keep going without support.
Mark Vaile says measures are being considered to try to keep young people on the land and to ensure businesses survive.
"Circumstances have been presented to us where there are directly agricultural-related small businesses, like harvesting contractors, spray contractors, that are being significantly affected in many EC [exceptional circumstances] areas," he said.

Fruit canning company offers drought help to farmers
Australia's biggest fruit canning company is offering extra drought assistance to growers to shore up supplies for the summer.
SPC Ardmona is offering suppliers in Victoria's Goulburn Valley a $1.7 million package.
Managing director Nigel Garrard says the package includes loans, access to water and extra payments for fruit.
"It's three prongs to it, firstly, is interest free loans to enable them to buy water because we recognise a number of them need some help with the funding of the water," he said.
"Secondly, are subsidies on fruit delivered to us and that'll be for fruit and tomatoes.

Patchy rainfall welcomed across NSW
Inland New South Wales has received its most widespread rainfall in more than three months.
Falls over the past 24 hours have been patchy, with 50 millimetres in the state's north but nothing in some central and western districts.
But farmers in the central west say any rain is welcome.
"We had 26 millimetres in two storms. One yesterday afternoon and one sometime early this morning," one farmer said.
"Certainly some of our later paddocks, which we were saving for seed, it will help them. It won't help the yield but it will help the grain size."
Another farmer said: "Two storms, one yesterday afternoon, 24 millimetres in 15 minutes and didn't it come down."
"Two storms, one yesterday afternoon with five millimetres and then another one about 4:00am (AEDT), and we picked up 16 millimetres. A little bit of heavy stuff in it," a third farmer said.
"[We got] about half a millimetre, we can't measure anything under that," a fourth farmer said.

Speed limit caps punish remote families: resident
Remote residents in the Northern Territory are outraged at Government plans to cap open speed limits.
By the end of next year, all travellers on the Stuart, Arnhem, Barkly and Victoria Highways will have to stick to a 130 kilometre an hour limit.
All other roads will have a 110 kilometre per hour cap.
Jo Coulthard from Orange Creek Station, south of Alice Springs, says the changes punish remote families.
"I don't think it's going to be upheld because how are they going to police it?" she said.
"We would have to take more time to do the travelling, which of course when you are working or living on a station you don't have a lot of time to be doing that sort of stuff.
"I think that's going to have a huge impact on us. Instead of just being an overnight trip... now it will have to be a couple of nights.

Scientist pessimistic about alternative fuel in Aust
Australia's chief scientist does not think alternative fuels have a big future in the country because of a shortage of available production land.
Dr Jim Peacock made the comments ahead of the Australian Farm Institute's strategic round table meeting on agriculture in Sydney today.
The conference is examining how science will assist agriculture over the next decade, especially in the areas of climate change, GM technology and strengthening international markets.
Dr Peacock says people must be realistic about the potential offered by the alternative energy source.
"There's a lot of talk about agriculture and biofuels, I personally don't think that's going to be of very much significance in Australia," he said.
"It's just a question of available land, production land.
"There's no doubt that ethanol is useful as a blend et cetera, but they'll be part of the portfolio.

Country students falling behind in maths, science
Primary school principals says rural students are falling behind in maths and science because of a shortage of teachers.
The National Centre of Science and Maths says country pupils fall further behind city students, the further they live from a major city.
Leonie Trimper from the Australian Primary Principals Association says rural schools need specific funding to help them attract and keep specialist teachers.

TV station operator pushes for rural channel
The operators of a rural community television station say the Federal Government is ignoring requests for a new digital TV station dedicated to rural Australia.
South Australian-based BushVision says in a national survey of 250 people, more than 90 per cent believed rural issues were not covered adequately by mainstream TV networks and almost all supported a dedicated rural channel.
The Federal Government wants digital technology to replace the current analogue network within six years.
BushVision station manager Leon Ashby there is good reasons for a rural channel.
"For many years, our information and our news has either been sensationalised and it puts a picture of rural Australians always whingeing, always got a flood or a fire, or some catastrophe," he said.
"But it doesn't give the overall picture that there's a lot of good things happening.
"We talked about better communications for the bush but television has been left completely out of the picture."

Tough decisions facing irrigators
South Australia's peak irrigators body says some farmers may not survive the latest cut in water allocations.
River Murray water entitlements have been cut from 70 to 60 per cent after another month of record low inflows across the Murray Darling Basin.
Ian Zadow from SA Murray Irrigators says some will have to make tough decisions in the coming weeks.
"I'm sure that this is going to create real problems for a lot of irrigators," he said.

Anthrax season starts early
New South Wales has had an early start to the anthrax season, with two properties already suffering stock losses.
The state normally sees about four cases of stock losses from anthrax each year.
Catherine Taragel from the Department of Primary Industries says, "we have had an early start to the summer period and we have started to see anthrax cases," she said.

Dry forces cattle sell-off
One of the biggest cattle stations in the world has been forced to sell 12,000 head as the dry continues.
Anna Creek Station in South Australia's far north has reduced its stock levels from 16,000 head to 4,000 since late last year.
Manager Randall Crozier says most of the cattle have been sold or sent to feedlots.
"We've been destocking pretty well since November last year and we're pretty well in full swing now we're down," he said.
"We're down to approximately less than a quarter of our stocking rate at the moment and if it doesn't rain soon, there'll be even less than that.

Soybean producers buoyed by higher prices
Higher prices have led soybean producers on the New South Wales north coast to plan their biggest crop plantings in years.
Growers are being offered an opening price of $380 a tonne for beans for the crushing market.
Buyers agent Kerry Handford says the drought has played a part in the price jump, but it is mainly due to growing interest in biofuels.
"I think that's starting to put a bit of a surge in everything," he said.
"They can use the oil in a biodiesel situation because the soybean produces 20 per cent of its mass in oil.
"And also our food chains are getting away from solid fats into oils to do their cooking for health reasons.

Deadline for Wool Poll vote
Today is the last chance for wool growers to vote on the level of their industry levy.
Wool Poll is run every three years to determine funding levels for research and development, marketing and grower services.
Growers currently pay a levy of 2 per cent of the value of their wool sales, valued at around $60 million.

Rain triggers croc breeding season
Good rain in central Queensland this week has triggered the start of the croc breeding season.
Koorana Crocodile Farms' John Lever says storms have brought falls of more than 200 millimetres, which has ignited passion in his reptiles
He says it is the earliest egg lay they have ever had.
"We were quite amazed that there was a bit of hanky panky going on there but no great surge of sexual desire," he said.
"But we got a good spread of rain over about three days and that really got them going then.

Cattle prices recover
Cattle prices have made a slight recovery as supply tightens across the country.
But there is a big discrepancy between livestock yardings and the number of both cattle and sheep being slaughtered at abattoirs.
Peter Weeks from Meat and Livestock Australia says many buyers who have enjoyed good patchy rain are still buying stock or choosing to grain feed.
"We're seeing yardings about 30 per cent up year on year both for cattle and for lambs at the moment," he said.
"And yet the slaughter side only up about 5 per cent for both.

Rain boosts cotton planting areas
More cotton will be planted in south-east Queensland after some of the best rain all year.
A band of rain and isolated thunderstorms crossed the region over the weekend with 102 millimetres recorded at Warwick, 64 at Kingaroy and 51 at Warra.
While some of the state's most drought-affected areas missed out, Darling Downs cotton grower Ian Speed says he can now double his crop planting.
"We'll be able to plant some dryland cotton now, we'd only had about a hundred hectares of cotton that we'd pre-watered and now we'll put in probably another 200 hectares of cotton," he said.

Rain expected to boost locust numbers
Farmers in Western Australia's wheatbelt received significant rainfall from thunderstorms at the weekend but it is creating problems for growers trying to harvest crops.
Falls of between 15 and 20 millimetres were recorded on average but there are now concerns the rain will cause an increase in locust numbers.
Entomologist Kevin Walden says the rain will give the current locust plague a boost.
"The adult locusts will survive well now," he said.
"They'll move probably larger distances than they normally would if they didn't have any rainfall and there definitely is the possibility of an air glade.

Uranium exploration companies booming
Australian uranium exploration companies are booming due to the increasing international focus on cleaner energy production.
Recent floats have been heavily over-subscribed and have closed early, while many stocks are doubling their issue price in a single day of trading.
Investment manager with broking house ASANDAS Mark Niutta believes public attitudes to uranium mining are changing.

WA potato growers urged to pull their spuds early
Potato growers in Western Australia are being asked to pull their spuds before they have reached full yield production due to looming shortages.
A lack of processing potatoes in the eastern states due to drought and frosts earlier in this year has led to a surge in demand.
President of the WA Vegetable Growers Association Jim Turley says because growers have been asked to harvest earlier, they should be paid more.
"It is tight all round Australia. The growers are under pressure with their costs going up all the time," he said.

Aerial contractors look to cut costs
The drought is expected to cut rice production in southern New South Wales by 80 per cent to 200,000 tonnes.
The crop is normally being sown by plane at this time of the year but aerial contractors are reporting a big downturn in business.
Phil Sefton from Field Air at Deniliquin has not employed casual staff this season and is looking at other ways to cut costs.
"There's not many businesses out there that could say if they lost 95 per cent of their work they'd be in a very financial position," he said.

Stud breeders seek govt assistance
Stud breeders in the cattle industry say they are worried about the loss of valuable genetics, unless they receive drought assistance.
Many do not qualify for Federal Government support because of high off-farm incomes.
The industry says most of that income is being used to support stud properties during the drought.
Central Victorian murray grey breeder Marilyn Pell says she is going into serious debt but doesn't want to have to sell cows to abattoirs.
"I've paid up to $2,500 just for one cow because she was a well bred cow with her genetics," she said.
"If I was to send her in now to get her head cut off you know I'd be lucky to get $400.

Govt playing catch-up on water policy, says Labor
Labor has attacked the Federal Government for not doing enough to prepare the country for drought.
The Prime Minister will hold a water crisis meeting with four state governments tomorrow to look at critical storage levels in the Murray Darling River system and the implications for irrigators.
The Murray Darling Basin received just 3.2 millimetres of rain last month, the lowest rainfall since records began.
Opposition agriculture and fisheries spokesman Gavan O'Connor says the Coalition is playing catch-up on policy.
"Labor proposed a summit on climate change and water some two years ago and that suggestion was met with derision by the Government," he said.
"Now with the Murray Darling Basin in a state of stress, systems not having enough water to meet farmers needs and some farmers allocations down to 30 per cent some not at all, the Government has decided to act. It's simply not good enough."
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGuaran says the current dry conditions are no-one's fault and steps have been taken to manage low water levels.
Irrigators from the Murray Darling Basin say environmental flows should be used to boost city water shortages.
The lobby group, Irrigators Australia Limited, has put forward a five point plan to the Federal Government looking at how to deal with the water crisis.
Chairman Barry Croke says governments should reduce water flows for the environment, instead of buying water off farmers.
"Irrigators' water is needed to feed people and we think that's very, very important but urban use when it starts competing with irrigation water in this time of real scarcity, it's creating an enormous problem to produce food," he said.
"So environmental water is there and normally the gum trees wouldn't be getting environmental water in this situation and we just believe urbans ought to be supplemented by environmental water."

Pumping water
Calls to pump water from northern Australia to the south has received support from a US scientist, who says similar projects have solved water shortages there.
Professor Scott Bassett from the Desert Research Institute in Nevada says water in rivers and underground basins is worth big money.
He says in the US water is being piped from farming areas to cities because population growth is outstripping water supplies.
"Water moves uphill and it moves uphill to money. Big cities will pay for their water supply in such a way as $3 billion canals from Phoenix to the Colorado River so they'll ship the water from the Colorado River to cities like Phoenix which has the base to supply the economic drive to get the water up there," he said.
But former Californian farmer Spike Dessert, who now lives in the Kimberley, says the distance water is piped in the US does not compare with Australia.
He says some pumping schemes are just 300 kilometres long, nothing compared to the thousands of kilometres of pipeline that would be needed here.

Expert wants dingo controls relaxed
There has been a call to relax controls on dingoes and even reintroduce them in some parts of Australia.
In a new book, Professor Chris Johnson of James Cook University says it is important to conserve the pure-bred dingo.
He says he understands the damage wild dogs cause to livestock but argues the dingo is a natural predator of other ferals .

Sponge cake cook-off whips up competition
The men of north-west Tasmania have proved a dab hand in the kitchen, whipping up frenzied competition at a weekend sponge cake cook-off.
Fourteen cooks lined up for the men-only competition at the Ulverstone Show on Saturday.
Entrant Barry Smith says he had a novel way of making sure there was enough air in his cake mixture.

High rabbit numbers worry graziers
Graziers are concerned that high rabbit numbers will hinder the recovery of pastoral country after the drought.
David Lord of Thackaringa station near Broken Hill says he is concerned that the calicivirus is losing its impact in controlling rabbit populations.
Mr Lord is calling for a complete stocktake of what is going on with rabbits and control methods.
"General talk around the bush [is] that rabbit numbers increased over the last six months," he said.
"Definitely need some finance to support a scientific team to get a good handle on RHD so we know whether any resistance is developing.

Rural Aust fairly protected from interest rate rise: NAB
Rural Australia is expected to ride out any further interest rate rise better than most.
The National Australia Bank (NAB) says many farmers have locked their loans into fixed rates to guard against a rise.
It is widely tipped the Reserve Bank will announce an increase of a quarter of a per cent tomorrow.
The NAB's general manager of agribusiness, Wayne Carlson, says the farm sector is managing its financial commitments much better.
"Of our agricultural loan book there is something in excess of 70 per cent of that managed on fixed rate or capped rate, or with interest rate risk management tools if you like applied to assist," he said.

WA export holding yards breaching standards: RSPCA
The RSPCA says most live export holding yards in Western Australia breach new national quarantine standards.
The animal welfare body is investigating what it says is a lack of shelter at one of the state's biggest ports at Wyndham.
It says cattle, goats and pigs are forced to stand in temperatures of more than 40 degrees for up to three days without shade.
Since the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS) standards are not enforceable, the RSPCA wants the owner of the yards, the Ord River District Co-operative, to provide shelter.
But spokesman Jim Hughes says that is unlikely to happen.
Mr Hughes says the facilities are not part of their core business and they do not receive enough rent to warrant upgrading the 80-year-old yards.
"What we get for those cattle yards is no more than a donation," he said.
"In those circumstances why on earth would we want to spend a lot of money on facilities at the yard?"
The new AQIS export standards state registered premises must provide animals with protection from extreme climatic conditions.
But RSPCA prosecutor Robin Moore says he was told the standards are not enforceable.

Japan pressured to lift age limit on beef imports
The US Government is pressuring Japan to lift its age limit on beef imports.
Japan has agreed to accept beef from animals under the age of 20 months in the wake of the outbreak of mad cow disease in the US in 2003.
But US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns says the 20 month limit is too restrictive and not the international standard.

Uranium price expected to rise
The price of uranium continues to climb steadily, with predictions it could hit $US100 a pound by next year.
It is currently sitting at $US60, up from just $US10 five years ago.
ANZ Bank commodities analyst Andrew Harrington does not think the price will go quite so high but says demand is far outstripping supply.
He says there are 50 nuclear power reactors being planned around the world and the supply of uranium from old nuclear weapons is drying up.
"Nuclear weapons, the linchpin in supply for a long time but recycled nuclear bombs are fewer and fewer between in the old Soviet Union and the United States," he said.

Dairy co-op lifts milk prices
A dairy co-operative on the north coast of New South Wales is lifting milk prices to help farmers pay higher costs for grain to feed their cows.
The Norco Dairy Co-op will pay producers just over four cents a litre extra from January.
Chairman Greg McNamara says there is likely to be a major shortage of milk by autumn if farmers are not given support to maintain their herds.
"We're extremely concerned about the cost impact of grain on farmers and how that's actually seeing (a) farmers actually leaving and (b) the current farming supply left is using less grain and getting less milk," he said.

Irrigators await summit decisions on Murray Darling
The Federal Government says it will decide in the next few weeks what action will be taken to help the ailing Murray Darling Basin.
It has been meeting with four state governments this morning to thrash out ways to salvage river system.
Federal Agriculture Minister Peter McGauran says if there is a repeat of this year's dry conditions there will be an extreme water crisis across the basin.
But he says the governments have not yet decided whether they will compulsorily buy back water rights from irrigators to shore up town water supplies.
"Those are the hard decisions that we will prepare for next year," he said.
"We still hope obviously the drought will break but if it doesn't then there are going to be difficult decisions and people need to be reassured that all governments are working together on this.
"We're going to take action on contingency planning, we'll commission a survey of towns and cities' water supply situations, what options are available to us."
The National Farmers Federation says rural towns should be made a priority when it comes to water distribution.
But chief executive Ben Fargher is worried the decision-makers will not take into consideration the huge investment irrigators make in their water allocations.
"We do want a process set up to make sure that we can protect our core breeding stock, which is our productive base," he said.
"How do we protect those permanent plantings, those crops like orchards and other plantings that take a long-long time to establish."
Meanwhile irrigators in southern New South Wales are anxiously waiting to hear if there will be further cuts to their current water allocations.
The New South Wales Department of Natural Resources has suspended trade in the Murray and Murrumbidgee valleys to assess how much water there is for irrigators.
The department's David Harriss says the review has been prompted by record low inflows into storages in the Snowy Mountains.
"That gives Snowy Hydro the capacity to reduce what they call the required releases into the Murray and Murrumbidgee valleys," he said.

NT fruit growers bemoan lost Cup sales
Northern Territory fruit growers are hoping to have better luck on the horses today after missing out on lucrative sales for the Cup carnival.
The star fruit, also known as carambola, commands up to $60 a tray at this time of year.
That is more than double the price received outside of the racing calendar.
Darwin growers like Cheryl are hoping to get the crop back on track for Christmas.
"It's used a lot in garnishes and in salads," she said.
"We had a problem earlier on in the year with late rains, early cool temperatures and it just delayed everything - we are about three weeks late with the season for this time of year.

Tas company builds vineyard bio-protection mould
A Tasmanian company is developing a biological fungicide to control grey mould in vineyards.
Biocontrol Australia has won a Federal Government grant to commercialise the fungicide.
Dr Dean Metcalf says field trials have reduced the amount of grapes lost to the disease by 80 per cent.
He says the biological fungicide works with the help of a micro-organism that is native to Tasmania.

Good rain benefits Kangaroo Is beekeepers
Beekeepers on South Australia's Kangaroo Island are having one of the best honey seasons they have experienced in years.
Local apiarist Peter Davis says the large volume of honey is the result of good rains in autumn and early winter which helped set the flower buds.
He also says the dry mild winter kept the bees healthy and active.

Muswellbrook races cancelled because of heavy track
Racegoers in the heart of thoroughbred breeding industry, the Hunter Valley of New South Wales, do not know whether to laugh or cry today.
Despite being drought-stricken, the local track was soaked by rain earlier this week, causing the traditional cup day race meeting to be cancelled.
It is normally the biggest event of the year.
The Muswellbrook Races are as well known to the racing industry as the Melbourne Cup and attract some of the best race horses from across New South Wales.
Conditions were so dry in September and October however, that the club fertilised and watered the track to soften it up but recent heavy falls have now made it too heavy for racing.

Drought hits horse racing studs
Horse racing studs in Victoria say they are being hard hit by the drought.
A lack of spring rains has meant stud owners are buying in feed early this year instead of usually holding off until summer.
Fiona Smith from Nagambie, in central Victoria, says studs are being forced to pass the costs on to customers.
"We've had an increase in feed, feed prices are astronomical at the moment and are affecting us quite badly in regards to the cost of everything," she said.
"Unfortunately we've had to increase a drought levy fee onto our agistment so therefore owners are incurring extra costs."
Meanwhile country race clubs in New South Wales are concerned about their future viability.
Orange-based trainer Brian Cornish says low prizemoney, increased feed costs and high fuel prices are hurting.
"We're trying to get more money here. Everyone is working hard to try and get it for us," he said.
"That is the only way we will survive on the cost of living here today and training horses.
"The expense of it is getting astronomical now. The thing of it is they want all the money to go to Sydney. That's where they want the money for them down there, they're not worried about us very much here.

Calicivirus having an impact around Alice
Research is showing that a re-release of the rabbit killing calicivirus is having an effect near Alice Springs.
Rabbit numbers have increased dramatically in recent years, amid fears the disease is losing its effectiveness.
Kym Schwartzkopff from Parks and Wildlife says a number of rabbits have died since the re-release, but the disease has not spread as far as hoped.
"The main stop of the spread is usually caused through weather, it does seem to work a lot better within a mild climate where it's a lot cooler and a bit more humidity around and a bit more moisture around and the high temperatures that we have in the centre of Australia and also through the desert regions make it go dormant.

Giant Qld dam falls to record low
One of Queensland's largest dams has now fallen to its lowest level yet.
Fairbairn Dam at Emerald supplies 200,000 megalitres of water each year for irrigation, industrial and urban needs.
When full the dam holds 1.3 million megalitres, but today it is at just 14 per cent of capacity.
Nev Wogand from Sunwater says it would take an exceptional wet season to fill the dam.

Drought prompts call for seed law changes
A South Australian farmer wants the rules on Plant Breeders Rights (PBR) to be relaxed, so growers can donate seed to struggling colleagues.
New grain varieties are subject to the rules, which prohibit growers from selling or even giving away the seed.
Chris Lawrie from Tumby Bay says the seed companies should waive the ban this year, given the magnitude of the drought.
"Why can't they come out publicly and say well okay, if we either give or sell seed to somebody that we notify them of the amount of tonnes we've sold, who we've sold it to, then they've got a record of it all," he said.

Grain-fed cattle numbers down
The number of grain-fed cattle in Australia fell by nearly 60,000 head in the last quarter, due to skyrocketing grain prices and the worsening drought.
Figures from the Australian Lot Feeders Associations show a drop in total numbers from 940,000 to just over 880,000, with the biggest drop in Queensland.
Association president Malcolm Foster says South Australia was the only state to buck the trend, with numbers jumping 10,000 to 27,000.
"There's a lot of cattle that have come out of feedlots that have gone to profitable markets. Not all of them have been replaced," he said.
"If feedlots can't make the sums work between the price they can get for the cattle when they're turning off, and the price they've got to pay for the cattle coming in with the current grain price, then they'll just slow up their purchases of cattle and so you'll see reduced demand and the ultimate outcome of that is falling cattle prices."
Meanwhile, Tasmania's only feedlot is looking to import two thirds of its grain this year due to the poor growing season.
The Powranna feedlot usually buys more than 20,000 tonnes of grain from Tasmanian growers, but after frosts and a dry season less than half that amount is available.
Managing director Andrew Thompson says the company is looking to the mainland to make up the shortfall.

Supply shortages felt in pig meat industry
Competition between pig meat processors is heating up in the lead up to Christmas because of supply shortages.
As a result the market has risen to record highs this week, with liveweight prices as high as $3.20 per kilogram.
Greg Richter from Primo Meats at Port Wakefield, in South Australia, says the shortage has been caused by hot conditions last summer.
"There's been a bit of a general infertility problem that happened earlier in the year and that's just starting to come through now, it always shows up about nine months after they have the problem," he said.

US wheat industry facing export problems
Despite a boost from Australia's drought, the US wheat industry is facing widespread export problems due to quality and disease issues.
India is buying wheat again for the first time in seven years, but mostly from Australia and the Black Sea region, not the US.
"It's because their phytosanitary requirement just can't be met. It just creates an impossible barrier to trade," said US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns,
USDA is working with US Wheat Associaties to reduce these barriers.
But the group's Rebecca Coleman says quality and disease issues are "cropping up" elsewhere.
"We're having trouble in the EU, we're having trouble in Japan, I'm sure we're going to have trouble in Korea. We're having trouble right now in Kenya," she said.
Ms Coleman says sanitary barriers are now threatening to become more of a problem for US wheat in some places than tariffs.
Meanwhile, the Grains Council of Australia says a national survey of grain quality shows it is almost 100 per cent clean.
The National Residue Survey of Australian grain, a joint government and industry project, revealed that 99.9 per cent of grain for export complied with Australian Food Standards.

Funding shortage kills weed research centre
The Co-operative Research Centre for Weeds will close by 2008, after failing to win further Federal Government funding.
The national research and development body had sought an additional $30 million funding over seven years, but failed to meet three out of the four necessary criteria.
Chief executive Rachel Mcfadyen says it is a disastrous result because climate change will bring on fresh weed invasions.
"Some of the northern weeds will move south, as the temperature heats up so in particular for example prickly acacia, mesquite in the grazing lands will extend their range southwards to western New South Wales and possibly even in Western Australia," she said.
"Things like lantana along the coast will extend its range southward and we do offer advice as to how best manage those weeds and how to limit their spread."

New smut fears in Qld
Tests are underway to confirm whether the disease sugar cane smut has escaped from a quarantine zone in Queensland.
The State Government is expected to announce today that scientists are testing what's being called "suspicious substance", as smut inspection teams survey 600 farms around Mackay.
Smut was first found near Bundaberg in June, and authorites had thought it was contained.
The Canegrowers Organisation is refusing to confirm that the disease has escaped quarantine, but has confirmed testing is underway.

Mixed reaction to drought aid
There has been a mixed reaction to the Federal Government's announcement of drought aid for small businesses reliant on the farm sector.
Businesses which receive 70 per cent of their income from farms in drought-declared areas will be eligible for income support and interest rate subsidies.
The Australian Grain Harvest Association says it will help contractors struggling to make repayments on machinery.
But spokesman Rob Gribble is now urging the government to help contractors prepare for future droughts, by setting up a version of the Farm Management Deposit (FMD) scheme.
"In the long term what we request from the Federal Government is some sort of FMD facility so we can deposit money in good times and draw them out in bad and hopefully self manage our way through these things," he said.
Farm machinery dealers say they have been unfairly excluded from the new drought assistance package.
Vin Delahunty from the Tractor and Machinery Association says most dealers will not be eligible for aid, because they employ more than 20 people.
"Once again the significant employers in the regional areas, the people who employ the most significant number of skills in those communities, have been left out and to be honest, we don't understand why the Government has taken this action."
Irrigators say they are skeptical of plans to speed up interstate water trading to address critical water shortages in drought-hit states.
The federal and state governments have agreed that interstate buying and selling of permanent water rights will begin on January 1.
But George Warne from Australia's biggest irrigation company, Murray Irrigation, says there is little water available to ease shortages, because farmer allocations are so low.
"I think it was good they got together, but I'm as a bit of a loss to understand how permanent water trading is going to help the drought," he said.

New family day care system helps outback NT families
Outback families in the Northern Territory are taking advantage of a new system of family day care.
The Federal Government lifted the cap on family day care positions earlier this year.
It has resulted in more opportunities for approved carers, and parents can claim a child care benefit.
In the Douglas Daly, south-west of Darwin, mothers like Sarah, says it is becoming easier to juggle the farm and small children.
"We do claim the CCB (Child Care Benefit), which is a fantastic help," she said.

CCC investigates further misconduct
Western Australia's Corruption and Crime Commission (CCC) has revealed it has further evidence of serious misconduct and abuse of power by public officers.
The revelation follows yesterday's startling evidence at the CCC of secretly recorded phone conversations between the former minister Norm Marlborough and the former premier Brian Burke.
The CCC inquiry was originally set up to investigate the handling of a proposal to build a tourist resort at Smiths Beach, near Yallingup.
But the uncovering of secret phone conversations between Mr Marlborough and Mr Burke has now changed the nature and course of the inquiry.
Yesterday CCC lawyer Stephen Hall SC revealed the commission had for some time been undertaking broader investigations.
He said the investigations supported the proposition that serious misconduct by public officers has, may have, or is occurring.
Mr Hall said the investigation had been given the highest priority because of the need to protect the integrity of government in Western Australia.

AWB's wheat export decision 'disgraceful'
There has been an angry reaction to AWB's decision to block 12 applications to export more than 3 million tonnes of wheat.
The applications were by several companies looking to export to eight countries but AWB has used its veto powers under the Wheat Marketing Act to prevent the move.
Chairman of AWB International Ian Donges says the decision will protect the financial interests of wheat growers delivering grain to the National Pool.
"Quite clearly, if we were to accept the permits that total 3 million tonnes this year we would be derelict in our duty," he said.
"We are now looking at a potential harvest or a pool delivery of 4 million tonnes so it's very important to maximise those pool returns that we have every tonne available to service the international market place."
But WA-based grain handler CBH has described AWB's decision as disgraceful.
The co-operative wanted to export wheat to its South-East Asian flour mills.
It is the second time CBH has been knocked back and chief executive Imre Mencshely says AWB has again jeopardised the future of growers in the west.
"We cannot understand how an organisation can hide behind legislation to make a decision of this nature," he said.
"We've come out and we've said that we can do this on a regular basis and we've said we'll be out there for five years.
"To deny the growers of Western Australian $40 million to $50 million in a year of drought, we just cannot comprehend an organisation coming out in that way."
