"[The environmental cost] comes entirely from making fertiliser, running the tractors over the farm and operating the biorefinery," Farrell says. 
Better methods now being investigated would use the woody parts of plants, using what is known as cellulosic technology to break down the tough fibres. 
"Ethanol can be, if it's made the right way with cellulosic technology, a really good fuel," says Farrell, an assistant professor of energy and resources. 
"At the moment, cellulosic technology is just too expensive. If that changes, and the technology is developing rapidly, then we might see cellulosic technology enter the commercial market within five years." 
Fuel, food and chemical from biomass
Writing in the same journal, scientists from Imperial College London, Georgia Tech and Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee say they have teamed up to find ways to make a facility to do that. 
Their facility would make a range of fuels, foods, chemicals, animal feeds, materials, heat and power.
It would use biomass, a collection of renewable plant matter and biological material such as trees, grasses and agricultural crops.
"We're looking at a future for biomass where we use the entire plant and produce a range of different materials from it," says Dr Charlotte Williams of Imperial's chemistry department.
"Before we freeze in the dark, we must prepare to make the transition from nonrenewable carbon resources to renewable bioresources," her team writes. 
An oil industry expert says it is possible.
"Credible studies show that with plausible technology developments, biofuels could supply some 30% of global demand in an environmentally responsible manner without affecting food production," says Professor Steven Koonin, chief scientist for BP in London, writes in a commentary. 
"To realise that goal, so-called advanced biofuels must be developed from dedicated energy crops, separately and distinctly from food."

The diet stresses lashings of meat and limits fruit and vegetables
The high-protein Atkins diet has caused a "life-threatening complication" for a woman who strictly followed the diet, say US doctors.
Dr Tsuh-Yin Chen of Lenox Hill Hospital in New York and team report the case in today's issue of The Lancet.
The Atkins diet stresses lashings of meat, butter and other dairy products - high-fat foods typically limited in classic diets - but cuts potatoes, rice and pasta to negligible levels and greatly limits intake of fruit and vegetables.
The diet's premise is that a carbohydrate-starved body will start to burn up stored fat cells, a process called ketosis. 
Chen and team report seeing a 40-year-old obese woman a month after starting the Atkins diet.
She reported losing 9 kilograms after eating only meat, cheese and salads, supplemented by minerals and vitamins sold by Atkins Nutritionals, the company founded by diet pioneer Robert Atkins in 1989. 
The woman was admitted for emergency treatment, complaining of a shortness of breath, nausea and repeated vomiting that had lasted several days, as well as mild gastric pains.
Urine and blood analysis showed she had severe ketoacidosis, a condition in which dangerously high levels of ketone acids build up in the liver as a result of a depletion of the hormone insulin. 
Ketoacidosis, which is more usually seen among diabetics and victims of starvation, can lead to a coma. 
The patient responded well to rehydration and glucose infusion and left hospital after four days. 
"Our patient had an underlying ketosis caused by the Atkins diet and developed severe ketoacidosis," say the researchers, adding that mild pancreatitis or stomach infection may have contributed to the problem. 
"This problem may become more recognised because this diet is becoming increasingly popular worldwide." 
Diet "not nutritionally balanced"
In a commentary also published in The Lancet, Dr Lyn Steffen and Jennifer Nettleton of the University of Minnesota's School of Public Health blast the Atkins diet as "clearly ... not nutritionally balanced". 
"Low-carbohydrate diets for weight management are far from healthy, given their association with ketosis, constipation or diarrhoea, halitosis, headache and general fatigue to name a few," they say. 
"These diets also increase the protein load to the kidneys and alter the acid balance of the body, which result in loss of minerals from bone stores, thus compromising bone integrity." 
Steffen and Nettleton add: "Our most important criterion should be indisputable safety, and low-carbohydrate diets currently fall short of this benchmark." 
The Atkins diet builds on a long history of low-carbohydrate diets that reaches into the 19th century. More than 45 million copies of Atkins diet books  have been sold, and the impact of the fad has been far-reaching, elevating meat and "low-carb dishes" over pasta, potatoes and rice. 
Atkins Nutritionals emerged from bankruptcy protection earlier this year, specialising as a company that sells low-carb bars and shakes. 
A US firm that handles the company's relations with the media says it cannot comment on the paper published in The Lancet.

The findings suggest that drinking water might help decrease your sensitivity to pain
Going without a drink can make you more sensitive to pain, a study has found.
Australian pain expert Dr Michael Farrell of the Howard Florey Institute in Melbourne and team report their findings in today's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
"This is another demonstration of the plasticity of pain responses," he says.
"In this particular instance a mild perturbation of electrolyte levels, which is fundamentally what gives rise to thirst ... is enough to modify the pain response."
Farrell and team studied the relationship between thirst and pain in 10 people.
The study participants had pressure applied to their thumbs to induce mild pain and were given saline injections to stimulate thirst.
The researchers used a PET or positron emission tomography scan to measure blood flow in the brains before and after.
The results showed that people who were thirsty felt more pain.
Two regions of the brain (the pregenual cingulate and ventral orbitofrontal cortex), which were not turned on by either input alone, lit up suggesting a location where the two sensations were being integrated.
The researchers did not find that pain affected thirst levels, but Farrell says this could be because the participants were not made very thirsty in the first place and any decrease would have been hard to measure.
The logic behind the findings
Farrell says the team had speculated there might be circuits in the brain that allow one sensation to modulate another, which is important from the point of view of survival.
Hunger, thirst, tiredness and pain, for example, don't conveniently happen at the same time, he says, so it's important for the body to prioritise.
He says pain is accentuated because it is more important to survival than mild thirst.
"The sensation with the most immediate implications for survival is pushed to the forefront of attention," says Farrell.
Drinking to cut pain?
Farrell says the findings suggest it could be wise for people who are about to go through a painful experience should drink more water beforehand. 
He says evidence from different types of studies also support this relationship between drinking water and pain.
But could people deliberately use dehydration to maximise pain, say via torture?
Not necessarily, says Farrell.
"We suspect if they got dehydrated enough that the overwhelming sense of thirst would probably make pain less rather than more."
Previous studies in rats have shown that mild thirst makes the animals feel more pain but severe dehydration actually dulls pain, he says.
And he says, this too makes sense from the point of view of survival.
If you were very dehydrated it would pay to suppress pain because it might get in the way of your search for water, he says.
Ethical limitations of the study
Farrell says it would have been too hard on the study participants, who already spent up to three hours on the table, to test whether drinking decreased pain.
"They've got this plastic mask holding their head perfectly still and they've got both arms spread out, one of them with a hypertonic solution going into one vein and the other one getting radioactive isotopes. It would have been intolerable," he says.
And testing whether dehydration would have dulled pain would be similarly tricky ethically, he says.

Relatives of this snail left an unusual evolutionary trail. They may have hitched a ride around the world on the back of migratory birds to form new species on distant islands
The animal kingdom's least-likely island-hopping creatures - land snails - have managed to jump from Europe to the Azores, scientists say.
They then jumped some 9000 kilometres of snail-dissolving ocean to the isolated Tristan da Cunha island group, deep in the South Atlantic.
The remarkable and mysterious dispersal abilities of the land snails, belonging to the Balea genus, have resulted in the evolution of eight new Tristan island species.
It was the snails' genes that gave away their ancestors' immigration patterns, according to a study in the latest issue of the journal Nature. 
Researchers still don't know how the snails made the trip.
One possibility is that a tiny juvenile member of the hermaphroditic snail became stuck in the feathers of a wading bird that was blown off course and ended up on the islands, says Dr Richard Preece, of the University of Cambridge, a co-author on the Nature paper.
"The problem is that these are land snails and they don't like salt, as you well know," says the University of Hawaii's Dr Robert Cowie, a snail researcher who is working on a very similar, but far larger, study on the dispersal history of Pacific land snails.
Salt water pretty much rules out one common way for animals and plants to reach islands: by raft.
In fact, it was Charles Darwin who tested whether self-sealed land snails could survive on logs or other floating debris. In the end, he preferred the idea that birds brought them.
But there is a third possibility, says Cowie. The snails might have flown without birds.
There have been wind tunnel studies of how far juvenile snails from Greek islands can blow in the wind. It has been calculated that small snails can be blown more than 16 kilometres.
"In the Pacific we have even tinier snails," says Cowie. What's more, most of them live in trees, where they could conceivably be caught on a freed leaf during a hurricane and carried for thousands of miles.
"So there's that scenario, which makes it even more possible to imagine flying snails."
To get the present numbers and diversity of snails on the Hawaiian islands, for instance, Cowie and his colleagues figure that they'd only need one snail-carrying, hurricane-driven leaf to reach the islands every 10,000 years.
As for the Tristan da Cunha island snails, it could be birds or storms that brought them there, says Cowie. At present, there is no easy way to find out.

The genetic code of marsupials has been documented for the first time with the sequencing of the opossum genome
The sequencing of the first marsupial genome has allowed researchers to trace the immune system of mammals back to what they've dubbed an ancestral "immune supercomplex".
And the research suggests that the human immune system in its present form is a surprisingly recent innovation, says Australian evolutionary biologist Dr Kathy Belov from the University of Sydney, who led the international team.
The grey short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica), found in South America, is the first marsupial to have its genome sequenced.
The sequencing was done at the Broad Institute in the US and the current research represents the first gene cluster characterised.
Belov and colleagues from Australia, Europe and the US report their research on the region, known as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), in the journal Plos Biology today.
"The research has helped form a picture of what that region would have looked like in ancestral mammals," Belov says.
That picture shows a central complex of immune genes that have since dispersed and are now scattered around a variety of chromosomes.
A supercomplex of immunity
"We're finding that the opossum has a couple of genes in their MHC which aren't in the MHC of other species, and other species have genes in their MHC which aren't in other species," Belov says.
"By tracing it back we can see that originally there was this big cluster of immune genes ... and over time those genes have moved out of this central complex.
"It suggests there was one big immune gene supercomplex in a mammalian ancestor.
"It's a bit like a dinosaur in that we only know that it's around from the fossil evidence."
Belov will also examine the MHC in the platypus, the first monotreme, or egg-laying mammal, to have its genome sequenced.
Understanding immune systems will help to conserve vulnerable species, Belov says.
Mammal evolution
It's believed that the first monotreme appeared about 210 million years ago and marsupial and placental mammalian lineages separated around 180 million years ago.
South American and Australian marsupials split about 70 million years ago with the break up of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, and continued to evolve separately.
Today the South American and Australian groups are about as different as humans and mice, Belov says.
Belov says birds and other non-mammals have a relatively simple MHC whereas in placental mammals it is much more complex.
"Marsupial MHC turns out be intermediate," she says.
This suggests that "there's been some major changes [in the human immune system] that have gone on quite recently and they're probably more recent than a lot of people expected".
Comparing marsupials
A project to sequence the genome of Australia's tammar wallaby, being done jointly by the Australian Genome Research Facility and the Human Genome Sequencing Center in the US will complement work on the opossum, says Belov.
Belov also has an Australian Research Council grant to study the MHC in the tammar wallaby.
"If we have the tammar wallaby sequence and the opossum sequence we can pretty much predict the sequences of all the other marsupials", she says.

This person of European descent is most likely to have wet, gooey earwax. Now scientists know why
Geneticists say they know why people from some parts of the world have wet, gooey earwax and others have the dry, flaky stuff.
They describe online today in the journal Nature Genetics how a single gene controls its consistency.
Human earwax is a secretion that traps insects, cleans the ear and prevents the outer parts of the auditory canal from drying out.
But cerumen, to give it its scientific name, has long puzzled researchers, who have debated why different populations have a different consistency.
For example, dry earwax is more common in people from China and other countries in eastern Asia. And people of European or African descent are more likely to have the wet variety.
Dr Koh-ichiro Yoshiura, from Nagasaki University and colleagues say mutations in a single gene hold the key.
By looking at Japanese people with different types of earwax, they identified the gene ABCC11, which codes for a type of cell channel.
This channel acts as a kind of gate to control the flow of molecules, which in turn determines wax type.
A mutation in this gene alters the channel's structure and reduces its activity, affecting the wax consistency.
People who inherit two copies of the mutant gene, one from each parent, have dry earwax. Any other combination gives you goo.
The authors compared the gene with earwax genes from 33 different populations around the world, plotting a time-map of where and when the gene mutated.
They conclude that the change in the channel type first occurred in northeast Asia, a change that then spread throughout Asia, and to Native American and Inuit populations with Asian origins.

Facial tumour disease can leave the face of Australia's carnivorous marsupial looking "like pizza", researcher Anne-Maree Pearse says
The mysterious facial tumour disease ripping through Australia's Tasmanian devil population may be an infectious cancer spread by biting, a researcher says.
Anne-Maree Pearse of Tasmania's Department of Primary Industries, Water and Environment reports in the journal Nature today that the tumour cells are chromosomally identical despite being found in different animals, suggesting the existence of a "rogue cell line".
"The thrust of my theory is that a cell line developed in a cancer in a devil somewhere, some time," she says.
"This cell line became persistent and basically had an existence of its own ... and is just passing through the population like an epidemic."
Pearse says during fights mutated tumour cells may break away from the ulcerated tumour of a diseased devil and become "transplanted" into a healthy devil, where they form the seed of a new tumour.
"We propose that the disease is transmitted by allograft, whereby an infectious cell line is passed directly between the animals through bites they inflict on one another," she writes.
Facial tumour disease, which first became apparent in the mid 1990s, is now present across more than half of the southern island state and has cut the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) population in some parts by up to 80%, according to the Tasmanian government.
Genetic bottlenecks
Pearse says devils may be particularly susceptible to the disease because of genetic bottlenecks caused by past population crashes.
The crashes resulted in a loss of genetic diversity, which may have caused a net weakening of the devil's immune defences, she says.
Her colleague Dr Menna Jones, a conservation biologist from the University of Tasmania, says the cell line transmission theory is backed by her own research, done with Rodrigo Hamede, into devil fighting and biting behaviour.
"Given what we know about the ecology and behaviour of devils, if you're going to pick any species that might transmit any pathogen or disease by biting, devils would be a very likely candidate," Jones says.
The theory comes as good news for those involved in combating the disease, she says.
"What's nice about the allograph theory is that it does make disease suppression or disease control simpler," she says.
"If transmission is simply transfer of tumour cells from devil to devil  ... the most effective thing you can do is simply to take sick animals out of the population." 
Jones says the research comes as the Tasmanian government prepares to launch a two-year disease suppression study in the state's southeast following a successful pilot last year.
The study will monitor the impact of isolating an estimated 300-400 devils that live on Tasmania's Forestier and Tasman peninsulas, where the disease hasn't yet established a stronghold. They will be separated from the mainland with devil-proof grates.
Can it spread to humans?
Pearse, who also has a background in human cytogenetics, says studying devil facial tumour will advance understanding of cancer in humans.
She says there's no human equivalent of a transmissible cancer but there have been cases where organ transplant patients have developed cancer if cells were hidden in the donor organ.
She says it's highly unlikely devil facial tumour disease could spread to other species, including humans, but this will be the subject of future research.

This old spacesuit will be tossed out of the International Space Station at the weekend to become a cheap, home-spun satellite. It'll transmit messages back to Earth until its batteries die out, then become space junk
Three Russian spacesuits are being prepared for a spacewalk at the weekend from the International Space Station, but only two will be coming back inside when the planned six-hour excursion is over. 
There's no mutiny in the works, though it would be easy to think so after watching what station commander Bill McArthur and flight engineer Valery Tokarev have in mind.
They'll be tossing the third suit overboard. 
No one will be inside the free-flying suit. Rather, it is stuffed with old clothes, batteries and a couple of electronics boxes. An antenna is fixed to the suit's helmet.
Then it becomes a free-flying satellite in orbit around Earth until its batteries die and it becomes orbiting space junk.
Because its orbit is relatively low, it will be pulled back into Earth's atmosphere within a few weeks or months and be incinerated.
The being does have a name, SuitSat, and a message, though you will need an antenna and radio receiver to hear it.
Run by amateurs
SuitSat is an innovative, budget-free, volunteer effort of an international amateur radio organisation.
It's equipped with a series of messages that last 30 seconds and a picture that will be continuously transmitted for as long as its batteries hold out. 
"The idea was brought up at [an amateur radio] symposium in October 2004," says amateur radio operator Lou McFaden of Orlando.
"At the time we had started figuring out [a project] that we could do that was low enough in power. A Russian representative brought up that [Russian space officials] had been trying to find something more useful for these old suits they had on the station." 
Just in time
The project quickly gained momentum, but time was short. With donated equipment and volunteer time, SuitSat was pulled together in a matter of weeks, delivered to NASA, transported to Russia and launched aboard a cargo ship that arrived in September 2005. 
Its mission is set to begin at the weekend. Thousands of amateur radio buffs are expected to try to pick up SuitSat's transmission during its relatively short lifetime.
The suit's batteries likely will last only a few days, says McFaden, who built the hardware. 
SuitSat also contains a CD with hundreds of pictures, artwork, poems and signatures of students worldwide. 
Project organisers already have their eyes on another Russian spacesuit expected to be decommissioned later this year or in 2007. 
"We're hoping to be able to do it again," says McFadin. "We already decided some things we want to do on the next one if we get the chance." 
Tuning in
SuitSat's signal will be transmitted on 145.990 MHz FM. 
"All you need is an antenna, the bigger the better, and a radio receiver that you can tune to 145.990 MHz FM," says Frank Bauer with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. "A police band scanner or a hand-talkie ham radio would work just fine." 
A log of people who have made contact will be available on the SuitSat website.
SuitSat is an outgrowth of the amateur radio project already operating aboard the space station, Amateur Radio on International Space Station, or ARISS.

The latest computer virus, which arrives by email, is ready to delete your files this Friday
A destructive worm posing as a pornographic email may already have infected hundreds of thousands of computers and could erase many everyday files on 3 February, security experts warn. 
The Kama Sutra worm, which targets Microsoft, Adobe and ZIP files, is a threat because many users will not know the virus has infected their computers until it is too late, security experts say. 
They also estimate that the worm, which spreads by emailing itself to addresses in an infected computer's mailbox, may already have slipped onto 275,000 to 500,000 machines and is now simply waiting to obliterate files on Friday.
The virus, also known as Grew.A or MyWife, tricks users by appearing as an email attachment with subject lines such as Hot Movie, give me a kiss and Miss Lebanon 2006.
Some variations refer to the ancient Kama Sutra guide to elaborate sexual positions to attract attention and convince victims to open the email. 
"It claims to be a movie or picture with some sort of sexual content," says Johannes Ullrich, chief research officer at the nonprofit SANS Institute research group. "That is how it tricks you." 
The virus causes a keyboard and mouse to freeze. It then disables anti-virus programs when the computer is restarted, leaving a machine vulnerable, says Ken Dunham, rapid response director at VeriSign Corp's  security unit iDefense. 
The virus mainly has infected computers of vulnerable consumers and small businesses, which are far less likely to have up-to-date security software, he says. 
The Kama Sutra worm also stands out because its primary purpose is to destroy files rather than to seek financial gain or to take control of a computer, security experts say. 
Dunham says any users who suspect they may have triggered the worm should reinstall an anti-virus program and make sure the virus has been removed. 
"It is already under way and will be activated unless people get removal tools," he says. "If you have opened an email and your computer froze up, you should be very concerned."

Humans may have domesticated dogs much more recently than DNA studies suggest
One of the most extensive surveys of the earliest known dog burials suggests humans domesticated canines much later than other studies show.
The survey, which suggests domestication occurred between 13,000 and 17,000 years ago, counters some earlier theories based on gene changes that distinguish dogs from their wild wolf counterparts.
A few of those theories held that domestication occurred anywhere between 40,000 and 135,000 years ago, much earlier than the new study suggests.
The new study, published in the February issue of the Journal of Archaeological Science, suggests that the bond between humans and dogs coincides with canine burials. 
The earliest known morphological evidence of what was probabably dog remains dates to around 17,000 years ago in central Russia.
But the practice of burying dogs appears to have begun between 14,000 and 15,000 years ago. Burying dogs then became more common around 12,000 years ago.
"[This] was a time of major population expansion, starting with, for our purposes, colonisation for the first time of eastern Eurasia and finally on into the New World," says author Darcy Morey, an assistant professor in archaeology from the University of Kansas.
"This is just me being mushy and fuzzy, but it seems that folks were a little more willing to try things, like drift into previously unoccupied expanses, and maybe engage in human-animal associations that resulted in domestication." 
Morey believes the canine genetic break from wolves may not be linked to domestication. 
"Quite simply, if the dog and wolf genomes really did separate as long ago as some molecular studies have suggested, or even in that vicinity, the animals that were destined to become dogs must have made their living for some time essentially in the old-fashioned way, like wolves," he says. 
An evolving relationship
The burials reveal our evolving relationship with dogs. Often dog skeletons lay alongside human ones. 
In one 7000-year-old Swedish grave, archaeologists found the remains of a dog stretched out on the legs of a deceased man, as though the man hoped to hold and pet his canine friend for eternity. 
The dog's neck was broken, indicating that it had been killed when its owner died. 
Dogs buried without humans in North and Central America still show a loving touch and possibly a ritualised internment.
A grave found in what is now Rhode Island, for example, contains a prehistoric dog that was arranged to lie on its left side with its front paw under its head. 
Sign of the times
The age and condition of the dogs when they died also reveal domestication and the bond with humans, according to Morey.
He describes a Middle Archaic burial dating from 6700 to 7180 years ago that was found in what is now Tennessee. The male dog discovered in the grave was "unusually old". 
Its skeleton indicates the animal suffered from traumatic injuries, arthritis, a persistent infection, and broken bones, some of which had healed, and some that had not. 
"The pathological condition of this individual suggests that the owner insured the safety and well-being of the individual throughout its life since it is doubtful that, given all the traumatic and age degenerative manifestations, the dog could have survived in the absence of care," Morey explains. 
More evidence
Christyann Darwent, an assistant professor of anthropology at the University of California at Davis, says she agrees with Morey's time window for dog domestication. 
"Dogs and humans could have been hanging out together long before 17,000 years ago, but domestication means we were manipulating their breeding, and that probably didn't happen until more recently," she says.
"The burials represent some of the best evidence we have for the strong social ties that exist between dogs and humans." 
Darwent says domestication has benefited dogs and humans, but she suggests humans should take responsibility for their alteration of canines over the millennia. 
"Some dogs, such as my own pet, are so reliant on humans that they could never fend for themselves in the wild," she says.
"We must remember that we have manipulated them so much with domestication that they often must depend upon us now for their survival."

Moroccan runner Hicham El Guerrouj's world record will be left in the dust one day, according to a mathematical analysis of times for the men's one mile race
Athletes could run the mile 18 seconds faster than the current record, according to an Australian mathematician who's gone back over the past hundred years of records.
Dr Michael Deakin of Melbourne's Monash University  first calculated the absolute limit for the distance 40 years ago when he declared it to be 3 minutes 32 seconds.
He will tell a meeting of the Australian and New Zealand Industrial and Applied Mathematics group later today that he has since revised the data.
He now says athletes could run the mile in 3 minutes 25 seconds, much faster than the existing record of 3 minutes 43 seconds set by Morocco's Hicham El Guerrouj in 1999.
Deakin says more sophisticated computing technology and more records led him to revisit his earlier work.
"The reason for revisiting [my original study] is twofold," he says.
"There's a much bigger data set than there used to be and secondly you've got all sorts of computational tools you didn't back then.
"So I thought I'd give it another run for its money."
He didn't make any estimate of when, if ever, this new height in athletic performance would be scaled.
Deakin arrived at the figure using non-linear trend analysis, a branch of statistics commonly used in economic forecasting. 
"I plot the different records ... and then I drive a trend curve through it ...which cuts out all the ups and downs," he says.
"The idea of the trend curve is to have a line at the top which more or less always will be achieved, and a line at the bottom which is never to be achieved."
In the past he's also used the method to estimate calcium in the bodies of dialysis patients and the trajectory of arrows as described in a passage of Ancient Roman poetry.
A three minute mile?
The mile, the equivalent of 1609 metres, has been replaced by the 1500 metres but is still common in some countries.
And although international athletics bodies now only recognise world records for metric distances, they have made an exception for the mile and still keep records today.
The mile was once famed for the 4 minute barrier which, was thought to be impossible until Englishman Roger Bannister's time of a little over 3 minutes 59 seconds in 1954.
Speculation has now shifted to the 3 minute barrier, although most experts agree that athletes are unlikely to meet this without some sort of assistance.
Dr Shane Brun, a senior lecturer in medicine at James Cook University and vice-president of Sports Doctors Australia, says it's almost impossible to predict the bounds of athletic performance.
But humans will reach a stage where they simply can't get any better without some form of modification, he says.
"Whether that's through evolution or science or drugs we just don't know," he says.

New measurements of planet 2003 UB313, dubbed Xena, show its diameter is about 700 kilometres larger than Pluto's. So will UB313 be named the solar system's 10th planet?
Xena, the possible 10th planet in our solar system, is even larger then Pluto, research shows.
Astronomers led by Professor Frank Bertoldi of Germany's University of Bonn publish their findings today in the journal Nature.
They say they have measured reflected solar radiation from Xena, or 2003 UB313 to give it its official name, using a 30 metre telescope in Spain.
The result: UB313 has a diameter of about 3000 kilometers, about 700 kilometres larger than Pluto's.
This would make UB313 the largest solar system object to be spotted since the discovery of Neptune in 1846.
Astronomers have been debating the status of UB313 ever since the announcement last year that it had been discovered 15 billion kilometres from Earth.
Pluto's defenders blasted it, saying it was not a planet ... but a vulgar rock.
Astronomers get abusive
The polite term for such abuse is a KBO, Kuiper Belt Object, for the estimated 100,000 pieces of icy, primeval debris that slowly encircle the Sun on the outskirts of the solar system, far beyond the orbit of Neptune. 
The UB313 supporters' club responded tartly, claiming that if anything deserved the moniker of KBO, it was Pluto. 
For one thing, Pluto, discovered in 1930 by American Clyde Tombaugh, has a weird, unplanetary orbital plane. It is a whole 17&deg; off the horizontal plane taken by the eight other planets. 
Its path around the Sun is also so egg-shaped that for 20 years of its 248-year orbit it's inside the track of Neptune itself. 
Now, weighing powerfully in this group's favour, are the first detailed measurements of UB313's size. 
If the data is accepted by a special 19-member panel set up by the International Astronomical Union to determine what constitutes a planet, Pluto faces being booted out of the solar system's elite club, and downgraded to a mere KBO. 
Either that, or the planetary list will have to expand to include UB313 and possibly many others. 
Time's running out
For Bertoldi, time is running out for Pluto as the solar system's outermost planet.
"Since UB313 is decidedly larger than Pluto, it is now increasingly hard to justify calling Pluto a planet if UB313 is not also given this status," he says.
Pluto's humiliation is knowledge's gain, though.
"The discovery of a solar system object larger than Pluto is very exciting," says Dr Wilhelm Altenhoff of the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy, a veteran watcher of asteroids and comets.
"It tells us that Pluto, which should properly also be counted to the Kuiper Belt, is not such an unusual object. Maybe we can find even other small planets out there, which could teach us more about how the solar system formed and evolved.
"The Kuiper Belt objects are the debris from its formation, an archaeological site containing pristine remnants of the solar nebula from which the Sun and the planets formed." 
UB313 has yet to be given an official name.
Professor Michael Brown, the California Institute of Technology astronomer who led the team that discovered UB313, informally calls it Xena after the warrior princess of TV fame.
But if the object is confirmed as a planet, he will be under pressure to name it, like the nine others, after a figure from Greek or Roman mythology.
In a naming competition run by the magazine New Scientist, readers' suggestions included Persephone, Pax, Galileo and Cerberus, as well as Rupert and Bob.
Last October, Brown and his team announced that Xena had a moon called Gabrielle, named after the on-screen warrior's travelling companion.

Pigeons will soon be equipped with a mobile phone to text their air pollution reports back to us on the ground
A flock of pigeons will monitor the sky for pollution then beam back their findings to a special pigeon blog, scientists say.
The 20 pigeons will carry a GPS satellite tracking receiver, air pollution sensors and a basic mobile phone, according to a report in New Scientist magazine.
The phone will allow text messages on air quality to be beamed back in real time to a website.
Miniature cameras slung around the pigeons' necks will also post aerial pictures.
The idea is the brainchild of researcher Beatriz da Costa, an assistant professor at the University of California at Irvine, and two of her students.
They have built a prototype of the pigeons' equipment, containing a mobile phone circuit board with SIM card and communication chips, a GPS receiver, and sensors capable of detecting carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide. 
"We are combining an air pollution sensor with a homemade [mobilephone]," da Costa told New Scientist.
The team is planning to squeeze all the components onto a single board small enough for the birds to carry in a backpack, the report says. 
The pigeons will take to the air at the Inter-Society for Electronic Arts annual symposium in San Jose in August. 
The data they send back will be displayed on the blog in the form of an interactive map.

Adding an immune system booster to diluted vaccines may mean a little vaccine goes a long way
Much smaller doses of vaccines may be needed to combat outbreaks of bird flu, tuberculosis and SARS than once thought, Canadian research shows.
The research by a team at the University of British Columbia could mean more shots will be available. 
The team led by Professor Wilfred Jefferies says standard doses can be reduced 100-fold and still be safe by adding an immune system booster commonly found in the human body. 
The study shows that when the immune system booster is added at low doses to vaccines and injected into mice exposed to rabies, measles and smallpox, an immune response kicks in to protect them from infection. 
The so-called TAP molecules deliver peptides inside cells from the body's immune system or vaccines.
If this transporter is switched off, as in cancerous cells, disease fighters cannot be moved where they need to go within the cell to do their job. 
The results of the seven-year study were published in a recent issue of the journal PLoS Pathogens. 
"This new paradigm is shown to be applicable to many viruses, including poxviruses, and could significantly advance the creation of new vaccines and improve those that already exist," the scientists say.
This could prove especially important if the H5N1 bird flu, expected by many to be the next worldwide pandemic, begins to pass between humans. 
What happens in a bird flu outbreak?
Bird flu has killed some 85 people since emerging in Asia in 2003. Experts say it could kill millions if it mutates into a form easily passed between humans.
It could take up to six months to develop a vaccine should human-to-human transmission occur. With smaller dose sizes, a hundred times more vaccine shots could be made within the same period of time. 
"We're hoping it will be incorporated into a number of different vaccines," says Jefferies. "It's powerful because we think it can make general vaccines much better." 
Smaller doses will also make some vaccines, including that for smallpox and anthrax, less toxic and therefore better tolerated by those with weaker immune systems, Jefferies says. 
HIV patients, in particular, could benefit, as well as up to an estimated 20% of the population who react badly to vaccines.
"Some pathogens don't currently have effective vaccines," says co-author Timothy Vitalis. "I hope the technology can be used to solve some of the needs in controlling infectious diseases." 
How do you boost a vaccine?
Jefferies first imagined the possibility of this application for vaccines after noticing that TAP is turned off in cancer cells, meaning that the body's natural immune defense does not recognise that it needs to attack these cells.
He found that when TAP was added to the cancerous cells the immune system suddenly 'switched on' and fought back. 
"TAP is a key molecule in the creation of immune responses," says Jefferies. "This molecule fought viruses when it was found in normal amounts in the cell. I thought, 'If a little bit is good, is a lot [of TAP] even better?" 
Researchers say they are not sure why the TAP molecules are turned off in cancer cells, but hope further study may eventually lead to a new cancer treatment too. But that is still years away. 
Jefferies says the team is currently trying the method out with prototype vaccines that could lead to clinical trials in the next two years, depending on funding. 
The research was primarily funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

This image shows the flash of light emitted when the Deep Impact probe smashed into the comet. The comet nucleus is in blue and maroon, and the impact flash is ringed in multiple colours
Ice has been detected on the nucleus, or solid body, of a comet for the first time, researchers report.
They say that Comet Tempel 1, the target of NASA's Deep Impact space probe, has three patches of ice on its surface.
But most of the frozen water probably lurks deeper inside.
Co-investigator Dr Jessica Sunshine and colleagues report their findings online today in the journal Science. 
The surface ice was detected by instruments on board the probe before it crashed into the comet in July last year.
Cameras spotted several patches bluer than surrounding areas. And infrared spectroscopy confirmed these patches were water ice.
The scientists suspect the ice is in large grains, probably aggregates. And the deposits are impure, with only a small fraction being water ice, the rest consisting of dust.
The surface deposits are also not enough to account for the water vapor in the cloud of gas and dust that surrounds the comet's nucleus, the scientists say.
"These new findings are significant because they show that our technique is effective in finding ice when it is on the surface," says Professor Michael A'Hearn of the University of Maryland, the project's principal investigator. 
"We can [also] therefore firmly conclude that most of the water vapor that escapes from comets is contained in ice particles found below the surface." 
Into the heart of a comet
Deep Impact slammed into the comet last year aiming to collect data about the comet's heart. 
Comets are of particular interest because they are believed to be made up of the leftover debris from the gas, dust, rocks and ice that formed the outer planets in our solar system some 4.6 billion years ago. 
Scientists have long known that comets contain substantial amounts of ice. But before Deep Impact, they did not know how ice was distributed throughout the comet's nucleus. 
Some astronomers believe comets 'seeded' Earth with some of the water and carbon-based molecules that make up living things.

Neanderthals used their knowledge of animal behaviour to hunt mountain goats like these Caucasian turs, just like early humans did
Neanderthals did not disappear because modern humans were better hunters and thus out-competed them for resources, say US and Israeli anthropologists.
On the contrary, they were top predators who knew how to hunt the biggest and fastest of the animals. 
Neanderthals went extinct about 30,000 years ago, after having inhabited Europe and parts of Asia for roughly 200,000 years.
The reason for their demise has been long debated and frequently attributed to modern humans' greater intelligence and consequently greater hunting skills. 
But evidence from animal remains hunted by Neanderthals clearly indicates these hominids were as good as any early modern humans at hunting, report Daniel Adler, an assistant professor and palaeoanthropologist at the University of Connecticut, and colleagues in the February issue of the journal Current Anthropology. 
The researchers examined abundant faunal remains, in particular thousands of bones belonging to a mountain goat species called the Caucasian tur that still exists today. 
The trove was excavated at Ortvale Klde, a rock shelter in the southern Caucasus in the Republic of Georgia dated to between 60,000 and 20,000 years ago. 
Evidence of killing
There was no doubt that the animals were hunted and killed. Indeed, the bones featured cut marks from human butchering and fragmentations typical of marrow consumption, showing that meat processing behaviours were not significantly different between Neanderthals and modern humans. 
"Given the abundance of animals, one might think that Neanderthals would kill as many animals as possible, regardless of age, and therefore nutritional returns," says Adler. 
But analysis of tooth wear revealed that two-thirds of the animals were animals of prime age, the strongest, fastest, most nutritious and most difficult to capture members of the herd. 
"Neanderthals, like the modern humans that followed them, were quite savvy, choosing instead to maximise their dietary intake per energy expended by hunting prime age adults. 
"Given the species involved and the rough terrain, this would require sophisticated hunting tactics, [and] knowledge of animal behaviour, in particular migration routes and flight behaviour, and group cooperation," Adler says. 
Expert timing
Neanderthals timed their hunts for late autumn to early spring, during the Caucasian tur's seasonal migration to lower elevations, where the site of Ortvale Klde is located. 
"They maintained an intimate relationship with their environment and were capable of understanding exactly where and when particular resources could be found in abundance," Adler says. 
Archaeologist John Shea, an associate professor at Stony Brook University says:
"The study is excellent, precisely what is needed: a comparison of how Neanderthals and modern humans used the same landscape close enough in time so that any differences discovered reflect behavioural differences and not environmental ones." 
Still a mystery
Shea believes that multiple factors, varying from region to region, may have played a role in the disappearance of Neanderthals. 
"The simple answer to the question of why Neanderthals became extinct is 'nobody knows'. But studies like this one certainly move us a lot closer to being able to make more clearly testable hypotheses," he says.
"Now the hypothesis that Neanderthals became extinct because they were ineffective hunters is in deep trouble."

A book at bedtime doesn't guarantee children become better readers in the long run, researchers say. Their genes play a bigger role
Genes, rather than reading to young children at home, have a greater influence on how they learn to read once they reach school, researchers say.
The study, published in the latest issue of the Journal of Research in Reading, is the first to demonstrate the influence of genes on potential reading ability in children younger than six.
The study of pre-school age twins from Australia, the US, Norway and Sweden followed into their early school years, found genetic variability accounted for most of the differences in skills that predicted later reading ability.
These skills included understanding the sounds in words, familiarity with letters and verbal fluency.
Australian researcher Brian Byrne, professor of psychology from the University of New England in Armidale, stresses that the amount of time carers spend reading to children at home is important.
But the research shows the significance of supporting pre-school age children who are having difficulties with letters and words.
"If a child is reading poorly in part because they are not as genetically well-endowed as other children, we know we will need to work harder and devote more resources to get them up to scratch," says Byrne.
By the end of their second year at school, the Australian children in the study show almost no trace of the influence of their home environment on reading ability, he says.
And the influence of genetic variability actually increases as children get older, he adds.
"We don't know which genes are involved but some of the genes in question affect brain development, maybe even embryonically. My guess is that in about five years, we will have identified a suite of actual genes that are driving this."
Identifying children with problems
Byrne says the study highlights the importance of identifying children much earlier who might develop reading disorders, especially dyslexia.
"There is evidence that early and focused intervention for potential reading disorders in children with family histories of dyslexia can lead to grade-level performance in the early school years," he says.
"Our findings should act as a spur to continued research, to adoption of the best evidence-based teaching practices and to early identification of children at risk for reading disability."

DNA evidence has questioned the quality of &#214;tzi's sperm, which may have affected his standing in Stone Age society
A Stone Age man found frozen in the Alps some 5300 years after he was murdered under mysterious circumstances may have been a childless social outcast, a new study shows. 
Italian anthropologist Dr Franco Rollo, from the University of Camerino, studied fragments of the DNA belonging to &#214;tzi, as the mummy has become known.
Rollo and his colleagues describe in the American Journal of Physical Anthropology how he found two typical mutations common among men with reduced sperm mobility.
A high percentage of men with such a condition are sterile, according to the museum that stores &#214;tzi the iceman.
"Insofar as the 'iceman' was found to possess both mutations, the possibility that he was unable to father offspring cannot be eliminated," says the South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology in the Alpine town of Bolzano.
"This not improbable hypothesis raises new questions concerning his social rank within his society," it adds, arguing that the new evidence supports a theory that views the man as a social outcast. 
Hikers discovered &#214;tzi in the mountains between Italy and Austria in 1991. 
In 2001, scientists found an arrowhead in the iceman's shoulder blade, and tests revealed blood from four different people on his clothes and a cut in his hand, possibly from a fight. 
Medicine in the man's pockets and sophisticated weapons seemed to indicate that he was a shaman or a chieftain.
One theory says &#214;tzi was the victim of a power struggle in his own tribe. A rival theory proposes the opposite, that he was a reject. 
Rollo and his colleagues were also able to assign the mummy's DNA to one of the basic groups of human DNA historically occurring in Europe. 
His basic DNA resembles that of the Ladines, an ethnic group still living in the region today, and that of residents of the &#214;tztal valley where he was found, the museum says.

The discovery of plant viruses in human faeces raises questions about the safety of human waste as fertiliser
Faeces from healthy humans contains live viruses, most of which are plant viruses that could sicken and deform plants, an international study shows.
The finding, published in the current issue of the journal PloS Biology, could have implications for the use of human waste as fertiliser.
Collected water, otherwise known as reclaimed or grey water, may also contain deadly plant viruses.
But future studies are needed to determine if such water, which is sometimes used for irrigation, can infect plants. 
The researchers say the viruses we pass probably do not harm us and airborne transmission is unlikely.
Instead, the viruses probably hitch a ride through the human body via food, even when the food is cooked or dried. 
"The fact that we could detect plant viruses in mixtures of foods consumed by the [study] donors suggests that the plant viruses found in human faeces originate from our food," says Mya Breitbart, one of the study's authors, a San Diego State University biologist. 
"For example, PMMV [pepper mild mottle virus] was detected in processed chilli sauces and chilli powder, but not in fresh peppers. 
PMMV survives processing of foods and passage through the human gut, and the viral particles are known to be extremely stable," she adds.
"There is no evidence that people should try to avoid getting this virus. It most likely has no adverse effects on human health."
Plants are not so lucky. Peppers infected with this virus can experience stunted growth and sunken brown spots that look like rot on the fruit.
The researchers found the pepper virus in 14 of 20 human faeces samples collected from healthy individuals in California and Singapore.
The virus might even multiply in the human gut, the researchers say, as the amount in the faeces was more than the virus load measured in food. 
The scientists analysed in detail the faeces from two of the test subjects, who came from San Diego, and were able to identify 36,769 RNA virus sequences representing 35 known plant viruses, two animal viruses, one yeast virus and four bacteria. 
One of the animal viruses is linked to diarrhoea, while the other, Moloney murine leukaemia virus, has been linked to cancer in humans and animals.
Some 24 of the identified plant viruses are known to harm consumable crops, including fruits, vegetables, tobaccos and cereals. 
"I am not aware of any cases where a plant virus has mutated into a virus that caused harm to humans. However, it is important to understand and characterise the viruses that are present in the guts of healthy humans in order to understand what is happening in the case of disease," Breitbart says.
"For example, if we want to look at the viruses associated with gastrointestinal problems, we will need a baseline to compare against." 
She even thinks humans might someday benefit from plant viruses, since scientists might be able to deliver medications for diarrhoea and other intestinal disorders using the viruses, now that it is known the viruses survive the acidic, arduous journey through our bodies. 
Surprised
David Relman, associate professor of microbiology, immunology and medicine at Stanford University, says is "surprised to see a plant virus dominate in terms of relative abundance to such an extent". 
"One might then wonder whether this is simply a relatively unique finding to one or few individuals with a specific dietary proclivity. But these investigators show that the findings are relevant to a diverse group of humans." 
He does not think the findings are worrisome. 
"It is probably the case that these viruses have been with us for some time," Relman says.

A waiting room questionnaire will make it easier for doctors to spot people anxious about their health, but with no physical symptoms, psychologists say
One in 16 Australian patients suffers from imaginary ills, the country's first study into the prevalence of hypochondria reveals. 
The research by psychologist Dr John Franklin of Macquarie University and colleagues, which will be submitted for publication, looked at 1381 patients who attended 13 family doctor surgeries across the state of New South Wales.
It found 6.2% of the population presented with a primary diagnosis of hypochondriasis.
"That's quite high," Franklin says.
It is generally estimated that only a third of patients who visit a general practitioner have a condition that is purely physical.
"At least a half, but variously estimated at about two-thirds, have a condition that's in some part the result of social or psychological factors," Franklin says.
"Roughly a third of the total patients actually have what you might call a psychosomatic condition, which is something that has a physical manifestation but has really got an underlying psychological cause."
Health anxiety
Franklin and his team went further to specifically investigate hypochondriasis, a condition where a person believes they have a serious illness in the absence of confirming physical evidence.
"This is more than just a psychosomatic condition. It's a condition where the patient actually believes that they have something seriously wrong with themselves," Franklin says.
Patients with hypochondriasis, or health anxiety as psychologists prefer to describe it, usually complain of physical symptoms, but these tend to be vague and non-specific.
The patients in the study were assessed using a questionnaire devised by Franklin and his colleagues called the Health Anxiety Interview Schedule.
Franklin says the form was designed as an alternative to the current international standard, the Whiteley Index, which he says isn't specific enough and doesn't link into the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders criteria for hypochondriasis.
A new test
The new test is described in the current Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
Franklin says it is more targeted, more streamlined and designed to be filled out by patients in the general practitioner's waiting room.
"The score they get can alert the GP to the possibility that there are social or psychological issues that might be going on," he says.
Questions relate to symptoms, physical signs, what the patient thinks is wrong, how long they've had concerns, whether they have found previous explanations reassuring and whether other doctors are seeing them.
On average, patients who fell into the health anxiety category were seeing between three and four doctors, the research found.
Franklin says it's important to identify patients with health anxiety because, along with children in the first year of life and people in their last, this group uses the lion's share of health resources.

Mmm, definitely rage. Computers are learning to recognise your emotions and soothe your stress
Wouldn't it be great if your computer could recognise when you're frustrated with it and adjust itself to calm you down? Emotion-sensing technology could someday allow a computer to do just that, researchers say. 
Computer scientist Christian Peter of Germany's Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics and his colleagues are working on a system that collects data about a person's emotional state using sight, sound and touch technology. 
The system then interprets the information and reacts accordingly. 
For example, if a computer senses that its user is agitated, it might tone down the background colour of the screen, turn down background music, enlarge or reduce graphics, adjust the flow of information being presented to the user or simply apologise. 
"With humans, somebody who ignores the feelings of others is not liked as much as somebody who shows some sort of emotional feedback. Why should it be different with computers?" says Peter.
But sensing emotions from a person is not always easy. 
Current methods for collecting the data require researchers to wire users with electrodes and monitor their behaviour in a laboratory. 
Less-obtrusive means, such as using a video to monitor gestures or a recorder to analyse voice, allow the user to behave more naturally. But the data can break down if the person moves too far away. 
Tuning in to your emotions
Peter and his team are working on technology that unobtrusively senses a person's emotions while they interact freely with a computer.
Their latest prototype is a wireless electronic glove that measures heart rate, blood pressure and skin temperature. 
Peter will be demonstrating the wireless glove at the CeBIT exhibition in Hanover, Germany, in March. 
"Fraunhofer has been on the leading of edge of innovating," says computer scientist Professor Rosalind Picard of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Information gathered by the glove is transmitted wirelessly to a base unit, which stores it on a memory card or sends it to a computer database.
Software written by Peter's team analyses the data and retrieves patterns that indicate certain emotions. 
Is that anger I'm sensing?
For example, if a person's heart rate increases quickly and their skin temperature falls below a certain threshold, it may indicate that they are angry.
A different combination of other variables suggests the person is slightly surprised or very surprised. 
The Fraunhofer team is also working on technology that will read facial features using an ordinary webcam.
The goal is to collect all the emotion-indicating information in one database, analyse it in real time and program the computer to respond immediately.

Stem cell lines derived from abnormal embryos can improve our knowledge of genetic diseases, researchers say
Australian researchers are seeking the country's first licences to make stem cell lines from freshly created human embryos with genetic abnormalities.
This is a shift from the current situation where all research in Australia on human embryos has been confined to frozen spare embryos created during previous in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) treatment.
The medical director of Sydney IVF, Dr Robert Jansen, says the group has applied to the National Health and Medical Research Council's licensing committee for two licences for fresh embryos.
One relates to embryos created during IVF, but having genetic diseases like Huntington's, cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.
The second licence is for IVF embryos that have failed to develop properly and contain chromosomal abnormalities or mutations.
"Both the new licences are [to] intentionally produce abnormal stem cell lines so that they can be used for research into the relevant diseases," Jansen says.
Dr David Cram of Monash IVF and his colleague, stem cell pioneer Professor Alan Trounson, are also seeking access to embryos with genetic diseases.
"We are going through a process at the moment to gain approval for using embryos that are being found to be affected by genetic disease for creating stem cell lines," Cram says.
"The whole idea is that we believe that these stem cell lines will be useful in ultimately identifying new treatments for patients ... to identify a potential drug to change the abnormality."
Fresh or frozen?
The use of fresh embryos was addressed by the stem cell and cloning Legislation Review Committee, which handed down its report last December about changes to current stem cell research laws.
The Lockhart report recommends that "fresh ART [assisted reproductive technology] embryos that are diagnosed by pre-implantation genetic diagnosis ... as being unsuitable for implantation should be permitted to be used, under licence, for research, training and improvements in clinical practice".
Cram says legislative changes will be required before researchers can have access to fresh, as opposed to frozen embryos.
However, Jansen says the restrictions on using fresh embryos are not enshrined in law, but are only a "suggestion" of the Australian Health Ethics Committee, which stipulates a two-week waiting period before a couple commits an embryo to research.
The timeframe effectively rules out the use of fresh embryos, which would be too old to use for stem cells after two weeks.
Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis
The abnormal embryos the researchers are seeking will be the products of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PIGD), which allows scientists to detect abnormalities in a blastocyst before it's implanted in the womb.
In a paper published in the journal Endocrine Reviews, Trounson reviews the use of chromosomally abnormal or mutant human embryos from IVF clinics using PIGD.
"These ... lines are an important resource for functional genomics, drug screening and, perhaps eventually, cell and gene therapy," he writes.
Cram says it's also more efficient to use fresh embryos because freezing can damage them.
He says the group will also apply to import stem cell lines created from abnormal embryos internationally to "cover all our bases" in case the application for a licence is unsuccessful.
Ethical issues
Associate Professor Sue Dodds, from the University of Wollongong specialises in feminist approaches to bioethics.
She says the biggest ethical issues about using fresh embryos relate to the potential to put pressure on women to provide embryos on demand for research, rather than creating them as part of a legitimate IVF process.
She says there are also perceptions about the so-called "slippery slope" towards production-line approaches to human life.
"As a matter of public policy it's been decided that we cannot create embryos for the purpose of research ... [but can only] use ones that would otherwise be destroyed because they're not being used for IVF," she says.

Ice crystals from cirrus storm clouds can regenerate, say scientists who have caught them on film
Cirrus clouds don't just form and die, but can regenerate, detailed images of ice crystals show.
The pictures are some of the first results to come out of the Tropical Warm Pool International Cloud Experiment being conducted from Darwin by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology and international researchers.
The information will improve our understanding of the life cycle of these high-altitude clouds and help us to make better predictions about climate change, the scientists say.
US researcher, Dr Jim Mather from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, says it's been speculated that cirrus clouds can regenerate.
But the latest images have "caught them in the act".
In older clouds, the ice crystals are small and pristine, which suggests they are newly formed.
"In older cirrus the crystals are actually being regenerated," he says.
"They're growing fresh crystals, so while the cloud appears to be a continuous sheet extending well out from the storm there's actually a life cycle within the cloud."
Thin and wispy
Cirrus clouds are the most common high-altitude cloud and can be found at altitudes of 8-17 kilometres from the surface of the Earth.
They can form sheets of up to 1000 kilometres across at temperatures between -20&deg; and -70&deg;C.
These thin and wispy clouds are made of tiny ice particles. They are a by-product of storms, lasting up to 12 hours afterwards.
Mather says cirrus clouds are an important factor in climate change because of the role they play in the interchange of solar energy between space and the Earth.
"If temperatures increase, what will be the effect on these clouds? Will they increase or decrease in area or extent? Because that can have an effect in either warming or cooling the climate," he says.
The images confirm that at higher altitudes there are some very small, spherical particles, about 20 micrometres in diameter.
More complex crystalline shapes were found at lower altitudes at the base of the cloud.
Mather says scientist have been discussing what shape ice crystals you might find at very high altitudes and very low temperatures.
"There's been an expectation that if you look at a freshly produced cloud from a thunderstorm it's going to be quite complex as the particles crash into each other and form large aggregate chains.
"But as you get well away from the storm you expect to get more pristine crystals.
"Actually seeing these images and confirming the ideas ... was really an epiphany."

Australian women should be given the option of taking a pill to terminate a pregnancy, advocates of the RU-486 drug say. But not everyone agrees
The abortion drug RU-486 is not like most drugs that chug through Australia's regulatory system.
Rarely has the availability of a drug been tied to such charged emotions, including headlines that warn of backyard miscarriages for desperate women.
Part of the debate, which is due to come to a head in a parliamentary vote later this week, relates to the drug's safety and efficacy.
Does RU-486, otherwise known as Mifeprex or mifepristone, have side-effects? And how does it compare with surgical abortions?
Under the current system, the conservative, Catholic, anti-abortion health minister Tony Abbott, has the final say on the drug.
But advocates of RU-486 say that decision should rest solely with health experts at the Therapeutic Goods Administration, as it does for other drugs in Australia.
Heated debate
RU-486 was developed in France in the 1980s and is used for terminating a pregnancy at less than nine weeks.
Sexual Health and Family Planning Australia says RU-486 has been used by more than 21 million women around the world and is available in 35 countries, including the UK, US, New Zealand, France, Sweden, Greece and Spain.
The drug works by blocking the effects of the hormone progesterone, which a woman needs to start and maintain a pregnancy.
It breaks down the lining of the uterus, which can no longer hold onto the fertilised egg.
Usually, the woman has to return to her doctor two days later for a prostaglandin, a drug that causes her uterus to contact and expel the products of conception.
How safe is it?
Associate Professor Anne Tonkin, a clinical pharmacologist from the University of Adelaide and a drug adviser to the federal government, says:
"Mifepristone ... is not a risky drug, and is not a particular threat to women's safety. It is not a poison or a toxin, and has very few side-effects.
"It works by mimicking a common cause of natural miscarriage. The side-effects are the same as those of a spontaneous natural abortion, and include bleeding as part of the normal response."  
She says that in 95% of cases, a miscarriage induced by mifepristone used in combination with a prostaglandin requires no further treatment. 
"In about 5%, as is the case for natural miscarriage, a minor surgical procedure is required to complete the abortion. This means that 95% of women who would otherwise have required an operative procedure could avoid it with the use of mifepristone," she says.
But a study that looked at all side-effects of the drug reported to the US Food and Drug Administration over a four-year period found there were serious effects.
These included four otherwise healthy women who had died from bleeding or septic shock after taking the drug, the most common side-effects reported by all women.
Of the 607 adverse events analysed in the February issue of the Annals of Pharmacotherapy, there were women who reported foetal abnormalities that appeared after failed abortion attempts, ruptured ectopic pregnancies and allergic reactions.
Emergency access
Chief medical officer Professor John Horvath has been concerned about the risks of later side-effects in some women who take the drug.
In written advice to the health minister on the safety for women in remote areas, he says RU-486 "carries a significantly higher risk [than surgical abortion] of later adverse events".
And he says that if doctors are not supported by services that could deal with emergency complications out of hours, this would "substantially increase the risks to women undergoing termination".
Another recent study, published in the journal Contraception, concludes the "safety of mifepristone is high".
When it analysed the results from more than 95,000 RU-486 abortions in the US, it found few serious medical complications in everyday use.
Some 2.2 per 1000 women had a complication, most commonly heavy bleeding. And 1.1 per 100,000 women died after taking the drug.
By comparison, the mortality rate from surgical abortion was 1 per 100,000 women.
Others have argued that rather than debating which abortion method is best, the aim of the current debate is to offer women a choice.
The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, for instance, argues that RU-486 should be an option.
Many politicians are yet to reveal whether they back availability of RU-486, so it is unclear which way parliament will vote.
But debate on the drug is likely to continue regardless of the outcome.

At least 23 companies have raced to register the domain name sex.eu
Hundreds of thousands of businesses raced to snap up '.eu' internet domain names, with 'sex.eu' taking the prize for the most sought-after address on the first day companies could apply.
Two months after the .eu domain name was launched for public institutions and trademark holders, the tag was opened up to companies other than those seeking a site for a brand, as well as for art works and literature. 
Within the first hour, sex.eu domain had received 23 applications, followed by schumacher.eu with 15, realestate.eu with 12 and business.eu also with 12 applications, according to the European Registry of Internet Domain Names (Eurid). 
In the first 15 minutes Eurid, a nonprofit organisation appointed by the European Commission to manage requests, received 27,949 applications overall and after one hour the number had risen to 71,235. 
The .eu domain name is not supposed to replace national endings such as .fr and .de but rather offer the possibility of a pan-European identity in cyberspace. 
Germans led the way by mid afternoon making up a little more than 30% of the total applications received to date followed by the Netherlands with 16% percent and France with just over 10%. 
Individuals will have to wait until the second quarter of 2006 before trying to get access to their own veritable European piece of the internet. 
For updates on who's applying for the .eu domain name, see the Eurid website.

This kentia or thatch palm grows near its sister species, the curly palm. So how did the two species arise when there are no geographical barriers between them?
One of the world's best examples of sympatric speciation, when two species from a single ancestor form in the absence of a geographical barrier, has been found among the swaying palm trees on Australia's Lord Howe Island.
Researchers have found two sister species of palms living side by side on the tiny World Heritage listed island 580 kilometres off Australia's east coast.
The two species, the kentia or thatch palm (Howea forsteriana) and curly palm (H. belmoreana), appear to have diverged after they began flowering at different times of year, probably as a result of differing soil preferences.
The international team of researchers, including those from the UK's Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, reports its findings online today in the journal Nature.
It's generally accepted that evolution occurs by one species breaking into two by the process of allopatric speciation.
This might occur when, say, a mountain range separates a species and the two populations change gradually until they become so different they can no longer interbreed.
But there are also theoretical reasons to believe that a species can split into two within its own area, a phenomenon known as sympatric speciation.
The researchers used a range of techniques to show that the palm species are sisters and indeed diverged much more recently than the island's creation by volcanic activity 6.4-6.9 million years ago.
They calculate that the palms' common ancestor probably arrived from mainland Australia as long as 4.5-5.5 million years ago. And more recently, H. forsteriana diverged from its related species, an ancestor of H. belmoreana.
Soil is the key
They note that the flowering times of the palm trees differed on different soils, indicating the ancestors of the two species may have adapted to different soil types.
They add that perhaps living on those different soil types modified the palm trees' flowering times, reducing their chance of interbreeding.
"That's probably what kick-started the speciation process and resulted in them finally being two separate species," says Associate Professor David Rowell, from the Australian National University, Canberra.
"This paper is very clever because it uses Lord Howe Island, which is very small, and where it is very unlikely that a species would be split into two, and so therefore it seems to be very strong evidence that sympatric speciation has occurred in this case.
"That being the case, it lends strength to the models, hypotheses and theories that people have put up about how evolution works."
Fishy clues to new species
Meanwhile, German researchers have discovered another case of apparent sympatric speciation, this time in two species of fish in Lake Apoyo crater, in Nicaragua.
A report in today's Nature says the lake is just 5 kilometres across and less than 23,000 years old. But DNA profiling shows that, during that time, it was colonised by the species Amphilophus citrinellus, which gave rise to A. zaliosus.

This owlet nightjar is one of the species found in the 'lost world' of West Papua, a world where animals show no fear of humans
The lost world largely untouched by humans that was recently unearthed on West Papua may be the last such find on Earth, an expedition scientist says.
His comments follow the discovery of a world teeming with new species, giant flowers and rare wildlife showing no fear of humans.
Australian, US and Indonesian scientists, led by Conservation International (CI), say they found the 300,000-hectare paradise in the Foja Mountains of the Indonesian-controlled province during an expedition late last year.
The local Kwerba and Papasena people, who are customary landowners of the forest, acted as guides and naturalists.
"The first bird I saw when I got out of the helicopter turned out to be a new species of honeyeater," says team member Kris Helgen.
The bird was an orange-faced honeyeater, a bird with a bright orange face-patch.
Helgen, who is completing a PhD under Dr Tim Flannery of the South Australian Museum, says the honeyeater is the first new species of bird found in New Guinea since 1940.
"Seeing that as the first bird was the clue that we were onto something big," he says.
The team also captured the first photos of the male Berlepsch's six-wired bird of paradise (Parotia berlepschi) in its natural habitat.
This bird was one of a number first collected in the late 19th century by indigenous hunters and sent to Victorian England where it was described as being of "unknown location". Several subsequent expeditions failed to find the bird.
"It's definitely an area of great biological novelty," says Helgen. "There are lots of things found in these mountains that are found nowhere else."
The team took the first photos of the golden-fronted bowerbird (Amblyornis flavifrons) displaying at its bower, a tower of twigs and other forest materials it builds for the mating ritual.
The bowerbird, like the bird of paradise, had been collected in Victorian times but no one knew where it came from.
In 1979, University of California's, Professor Jared Diamond was the first to demonstrate that the Foja Mountains was the true homeland of the bowerbird.
A lost world
Helgen says while Diamond made observations of a number of birds in the Foja Mountains, he did not collect data or specimens.
"We were the first to mount the true scientific expedition," he says.
Helgen says, apart from the reports from Diamond, there is no evidence that humans have ever been to the mountain range. Even the locals who took part in this latest research had never been there. 
The researchers say the area is probably a 15 or 20 day walk from the nearest village.
"Not only are there no people but there are no things that people bring with them: rats, dogs, pigs," says Helgen, adding these animals affect native fauna.
"It is a world that's been lost elsewhere," he says. "Much of the world would have looked like that at some point.
"What's so interesting and unique is that it might be last time this is ever done: high adventure, true exploration of a place where no one has set foot hardly."
Animals without fear for people
The team also found mammals that show no fear of humans. For example they were able to pick two long-beaked echidnas, a primitive egg-laying mammal, that had been hunted to near extinction elsewhere.
"The animals there just don't know people because people have never lived here. That's a very, very rare thing in this day and age," says Helgen.
The team also found a golden-mantled tree kangaroo (Dendrolagus pulcherrimus), which had previously only been found on a single mountain in neighbouring Papua New Guinea.
And they found new species of plants including the largest rhododendron flower on record, almost 15 centimetres across, more than 20 new frogs and four new butterflies.
Pretty impressive
Dr Ken Aplin, an evolutionary biologist who specialises in mammals of Australia and New Guinea, describes the find as  "pretty impressive" and agrees the remoteness of the Foja Mountains explains why it is in such pristine condition.
"People will generally hunt within a days travel of the village," says Aplin of CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems, currently based at the Kyoto University Museum in Japan.
Aplin says mountain ranges such as Foja originally started life as a series of oceanic islands off to the north of New Guinea, which over time, came closer and closer to the main central range and connected up in the past million years.
"So they were evolving their own faunas prior to becoming part of New Guinea," he says.
Other ranges along the north coast the Foja range would have evolved unique species too, he says, but their biodiversity would have been affected by humans, feral pigs and dogs.
"In a global context it may well be unique or very nearly so, in being one of the last places that is not showing any impact at all of human activities."
The expedition was co-sponsored by the Indonesian Institute of Science (LIPI) and received funding from the Swift Foundation, the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, the National Geographic Society and the Global Environment Project Institute.

This dinosaur, Guanlong wucaii, lived millions of years before T-Rex and is the oldest tyrannosaur ever found
It had an odd-looking crest and long arms, but a fossil dug up in a remote Chinese desert is the earliest example yet found of a tyrannosaur, scientists report.
The creature, named Guanlong wucaii, lived 160 million years ago, more than 90 million years before Tyrannosaurus rex.
It shows the tyrannosaur family had an extensive history, the researchers report in today's issue of the journal Nature. 
"Guanlong is the oldest and most primitive tyrannosaur," says Professor James Clark of George Washington University, who helped to lead the study.
T. rex, the best-known tyrannosaur, lived 65 million to 70 million years ago, during the Cretaceous period. This latest find is 90 million years older. 
"It is really pushing the record of tyrannosaurs back into the Jurassic," Clark says. 
Clark's team found two examples of the early tyrannosaur in the Junggar Basin in northwestern China, a largely unexplored cold desert.
Back in the Jurassic, the area would have been a large wetland bounded by mountains, says geologist Dr David Eberth of the Royal Tyrell Museum in Alberta, Canada.
It would have been warm, with sporadic volcanic explosions, he says. 
"These animals were found in mud rock," says Eberth, adding the deposits were made of sand, clay and volcanic material that secured the fossilised bones for millennia.
The wind has now eroded the dried deposits of tens of millions of years. "It is very easy to see what is in the rocks, what is coming out of the rocks," Clark says. 
The researchers camp out in the desolate region in the summers, working between sandstorms. They hire local people to walk across the rocks, systematically searching for protruding fossils. 
Sharp teeth
It was one such employee who spotted a bit of Guanlong sticking out and eventually the palaeontologists dug up two nearly complete skeletons, one on top of another. 
"We knew right away that this was a theropod dinosaur," Clark says. It had sharp teeth and clearly was a two-legged animal. 
But one of the two specimens had an unusual, thin crest on its head, and there was a place on the second skull where one appeared to have been broken off. 
"It's a very unusual skull with this crest coming off it," Clark says. "It doesn't immediately shout tyrannosaur when you first see it."
But other identifiers marked it as a tyrannosaur, including distinctive structures in the pelvis. 
The thin crest probably was used for display, Clark says. It has been coloured red in the reconstruction, although scientists have no idea what colour it would have been. 
They have also given the animal bright purple feathers.
"We have no evidence of feathers in this species," Clark says. "But there is evidence of feathers in another primitive tyrannosaur. We are fairly confident that it did have feathers." 
Dr Gregory Erickson of Florida State University studied the 'growth rings' in the animals' shin bones and determined that one specimen would have been about seven years old and thus a juvenile, and the other a 12-year-old adult. 
The creatures were about 3 metres long, compared to T. rex, which reached lengths of 14 metres. They do not have T. rex's shortened forelimbs.
The researchers, led by Dr Xu Xing of the Institute of Vertebrate Palaeontology and Palaeoanthropology at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, named the new dinosaur Guanlong wucaii.
The genus name is derived from the Mandarin word for 'crowned dragon' and species name refers to the region where it was found.

Be careful what you wish for this Valentine's Day
French kissing puts teens at greater risk of contracting meningococcal disease than their lip-pecking counterparts, UK research shows.
While intimate kissing with multiple partners appears to increase the risk of contracting the disease, the UK study found that recently attending a religious event was associated with a low risk.
The study, published this week in the British Medical Journal, involved about 300 teenagers aged 15 to 19 who had been admitted to hospital with a meningococcal infection.
Lead researcher, Professor Robert Booy, co-director of Australia's National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance at the Children's Hospital at Westmead says that the microbes that we normally carry in our throats are readily transmitted to another person through intimate kissing.
For meningococcal disease, this is the bacteria Neisseria meningitidis. Infection can lead to blood poisoning (meningococcal septicaemia), inflammation of the outer lining around the brain and spinal cord (meningococcal meningitis), or a combination of the two.
"When microbes that cause meningitis are transferred from one person to another, the body's immune system is normally able to repel them and they don't do any harm," he says.
"But if by chance you have a sore throat because of a smoky atmosphere or an existing virus, the inflammation in your throat disrupts the protective epithelial membrane.
"This makes it easy for the meningococcal microbes to pass through the lining of the throat into the blood stream and travel up to the brain where they cause meningitis."
But teens who avoid smoky parties and don't kiss with a sore throat may still be at high risk, the study suggests.
University students are a high-risk group, the study shows, as are teens who were born pre-term or who had glandular fever. Substance misuse was another high-risk behaviour.
"Our research suggests that vaccination is still the most effective way to reduce the risk of meningococcal disease. But behavioural changes remain important because the vaccines available don't protect against all causes of meningococcal diseases," Booy says.
He speculates that teens with a religious lifestyle may have fewer opportunities to exchange saliva, thus putting them at low risk of the disease.
"Believers might prefer to account for this particular finding as the power of prayer. Or it could be that the non-church goers lied about their kissing activities," he says.

The nearby supernova 1987A in its dying moments
Milliseconds before a giant star dies in a spectacular explosion, it hums a note around 'middle C', astronomers say.
In the April issue of The Astrophysical Journal, Professor Adam Burrows of the University of Arizona and team will report the song that immediately precedes the explosion of a supernova.
"We were quite sure when we started seeing this phenomenon that we were seeing sound waves, but it was so unexpected that we kept re-checking and re-testing our results," says Burrows.
Astronomers have long been trying to understand what happens when a supernova, a massive star, collapses and explodes.
Once it reaches death's door, a supernova's core is so dense that it does not allow energy to escape, and the star collapses inwards towards the core.
Until now scientists had assumed that the spectacular explosion in a star's dying moments was due to the star's outer shell bouncing back off the core.
But, says Australian supernova expert Dr Stuart Ryder of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Sydney, none of the models of exploding supernovae to date have supported this theory.
Basically the models don't show enough energy coming from the core bounce to overcome the collapsing outer layers.
"The stuff trying to expand would keep running into the stuff that is still collapsing and it would literally stall the explosion," says Ryder. 
There have been various attempts to tweak the models, including taking account of  neutrinos, which are emitted from supernovae.
But scientists found that these subatomic particles also do not provide enough energy to make the models work. The models still stalled before the explosion.
Sound waves provide missing link
Burrows and team have now developed computer models to simulate the events of a dying star, from the collapse of the core through to the supernova explosion.
"Our simulations show that the inner core starts to execute pulsations," says Burrows.
"They show that after about 500 milliseconds [after the core collapses] the inner core begins to vibrate wildly. And after 600, 700 or 800 milliseconds, this oscillation becomes so vigorous that it sends out sound waves.
"In these computer runs, these sound waves actually cause the star to explode, not the neutrinos."
The researchers say typical sound frequencies in the inner core are about 200 to 400 hertz, in the audible range around middle C.
A million steps
The new models involve a million steps and simulate the full second between core collapse and explosion. 
Previous models, which did not take into account sound waves, had only one fifth the number of steps and simulate only the first few hundred milliseconds after core collapse.
