"To see a positive effect two months later is quite striking," he says.
However, the study also reports that about a third of the volunteers experienced fear and anxiety after taking the psilocybin and McGregor says it should be avoided by anyone with schizophrenia or other psychotic illnesses.
First study of its kind in four decades
In what is described as the first scientifically rigorous study of its kind in 40 years, 36 volunteers were given either psilocybin or a comparator drug methylphenidate hydrochloride.
Subjects were asked to describe their experiences immediately after the session in a set of detailed psychological questionnaires and at a two-month follow up.
More than 60% of subjects (22) described the effects of psilocybin in ways that met criteria for a full mystical experience according to established psychological scales, compared to only 4 of the 36 after the comparator drug.
After two months, two-thirds rated the experience as either the singly most spiritually significant in their lives or rated it among their top five.
The God spot?
Professor John Bradshaw, an Australian neuropsychologist from Monash University, says the brain's medial temporal lobe is rich in serotonin receptors and has previously been described as the 'God spot' because it is active in transcendental states.
In a commentary accompanying the article, Professsor David Nichols of the Purdue University school of pharmacy says it's likely that psilocybin triggers the same neurological process that produces religious experiences during fasting, meditation, sleep deprivation or near-death experiences.
He says the current research adds to the emerging field known as neurotheology, or the neurology of religious experience, and could shed light on the "molecular alterations in the brain that underlie religious and mystical experiences".

The threat of bad weather can leave some people crippled with fear, psychologists say
If the prospect of bad weather causes you to obsessively monitor weather reports and makes your heart pound, head spin and palms sweat, you could be suffering from severe weather phobia, psychologists say.
In the first survey ever on this disorder, US researchers have found that it's more than just "thunder phobia" or mild anxiety about tornadoes or hurricanes.
They estimate one in five people could suffer from the condition.
Severe weather phobics are truly panicked at the very thought of storms and can't function normally until the weather clears.
"They get very afraid even when the possibility of severe weather is days away," says psychologist Professor John Westefeld of the University of Iowa.
This is not the normal, healthy worry most people have and which motivates them to prepare for a storm.
"They are really, really afraid."
Westefeld and his colleagues published the results of a small study of severe weather phobia symptoms among 139 people in the current issue of the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society.
A quarter of the people surveyed about how they reacted to severe weather reported enough symptoms to be classified as moderately phobic.
More than a storm in a teacup
Symptoms include dizziness, shortness of breath, nausea, heart pounding, feelings of panic, sweating, feeling helpless, constantly monitoring TV weather reports, inability to sleep or eat and changing schedules days ahead at the possibility of bad weather.
Fully 76&nbsp;% reported having multiple symptoms occasionally.
"I really don't know how extensive it is," said Westefeld. "It's clear this is definitely out there."
"There are probably several million people that have it," says Zeus Flores, the creator of the supportive website stormphobia.org and a self-described storm phobic.
But, Flores adds, in most causes people are very good at hiding the problem, which doesn't help them deal with it.
"Often family members may have a clue, but not friends and co-workers," Flores says.
Severe weather phobics can feel an overwhelming dread during storm seasons and some move out of their home towns.
"In my case I'd sleep in the closet at night with a map and a flashlight to track the storm," Flores says.
Treating weather phobia
Flores was part of an experimental storm phobia treatment program that Westefeld created in the 1990s. 
The program is based on those that treat people with a fear of flying.
An expert on the subject, in this case a meteorologist, is teamed with a counseling psychologist to provide sufferers with more factual information about what they fear and teach them techniques for relaxing.
One factor that isn't helping storm phobics in the US is the way the media covers storms, says Flores.
He says programs like the Weather Channel just used to provide weather reports.
"Now it's MTV-esque and about getting higher ratings," he says.

Carbon dioxide produced by burning fossil fuels has been blamed as a factor in climate change
Hundreds of deaths caused by volcanic leaks of carbon dioxide around the world are worrying experts who are researching how to bury industrial emissions of the gas as part of an assault on global warming. 
The concerns come as governments and companies investigate trapping  carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas released by burning fossil fuels, and entombing it in porous rocks deep below the ground.
But they have done little to explain the vast cost and possible risks of projects that advocates say could bury billions of tonnes of gas and do more to slow global warming than a shift to renewable energies like solar or wind power.
"There may be massive public resistance, as we've seen with nuclear power" if governments fail to convince voters that storage is safe, says Dr Bert Metz, co-chair of a 2005 United Nations report on carbon sequestration.
"Public acceptance...is a possible show-stopper if things are not done properly," he said during a recent conference of 1,000 researchers into carbon dioxide technologies in Trondheim, Norway.
Carbon dioxide is a non-toxic gas produced from respiration by animals and plants, making up a tiny 0.04% of the air. 
Levels are up 30% since the industrial revolution and most scientists say the rise is the main spur of global warming. 
Deadly gas
In pure form the gas can cause asphyxia because it is heavier than air and displaces oxygen. 
In the worst case in recent decades, 1,700 people died after a catastrophic 1986 release of 1.2 million tonnes of carbon dioxide from the depths of Lake Nyos in Cameroon, according to the International Energy Agency.
Thirty-seven people died from a similar seismic release from Lake Monoun in Cameroon in 1984.
In 1979, an explosion at Dieng volcano in Indonesia released 200,000 tonnes of the gas, smothering 142 people on the plain below. 
In April this year, three ski patrol workers died at Mammoth Mountain, California, when they were overcome by carbon dioxide while trying to fence off a dangerous volcanic vent.
"Carbon storage is not risk-free but we think the risks are manageable," says Dr Philippe Lacour-Gayet, chief scientist for research and development at Schlumberger oil and gas services group, one of many companies involved in research. 
He and other experts say any greenhouse gas stores would be in geologically stable regions far from earthquake zones and commercial carbon dioxide stores are safely in operation in Norway, Canada and Algeria.
Proponents of carbon storage say the risks pale when compared with the threats of catastrophic climate change, which many scientists say will spur floods, droughts, heatwaves and could spread diseases and raise world sea levels. 
Even so, massive storage could mean pipelines and stores under the countryside from Austria to Australia. 
Convincing the public
And the public may not take kindly to concentrating a normally harmless gas into a more risky form at a likely cost of tens of billions of dollars.
A strong argument for public acceptance is that people accept a host of risks every day - flammable petrol in the fuel tanks of their vehicles, toxic natural gas piped into their homes or electricity generated from nuclear power. 
"All sorts of toxic liquids and gases are already stored underground," says Professor David Reimer, a lecturer in technology policy at the University of Cambridge in England. 
"Carbon dioxide poses a far lesser risk than many accepted hazards."
Berlin has an underground store for explosive natural gas near the stadium where the World Cup soccer competition was played, he says.
And acid gas is stored underground near Edmonton, Canada. 
Carbon dioxide storage sites would have to be carefully chosen, and monitored for centuries.
"I'm more worried about public acceptance of the costs than of the hazards of leaks," says Frederik Hauge, head of the Norwegian environmental group Bellona which favours carbon storage. 
Metz's UN report said that storage could provide 15-55% of all the cuts in greenhouse gas emissions needed until 2100 - probably a bigger contribution than from renewable energies or from any revival of nuclear power.
It estimates that the costs of generating electricity from a coal-fired power plant would typically rise to US$0.06-$0.10 per kilowatt hour with technology to capture and store carbon dioxide from US$0.04-US$0.05 on a power plant with no filters.
Governments will also need to work out liability rules in the case of a leak. 
Most experts suggest companies should initially be responsible but governments would take over, perhaps between five and 20 years after burial.

Paternal age can have an impact on the health of newborn babies, research suggests
The babies of older dads tend to be less robust immediately after birth than infants fathered by younger men, a new study shows.
The research, published in the current issue of the journal Epidemiology, shows that new fathers in their 40s and 50s are slightly more likely to have an infant with a low Apgar score than fathers in their 20s. 
The Apgar score, which was first created in 1952, rates the newborn on respiratory effort, heart rate, reflex irritability, muscle tone and skin colour with a value of 0 to 2 for each.
The score is calculated at one and five minutes after birth and a score of 10 is the best result.
In recent years, several reports have linked advanced paternal age with various adverse pregnancy outcomes, including foetal death and premature birth.
But little was known about the impact, if any, on the physical condition of the infant at birth.
What the records show
To investigate, Dr Yuelian Sun, from the University of Aarhus in Denmark and colleagues analysed data from more than 70,000 couples who had a first infant born between 1980 and 1996. 
The team reports that compared with fathers in their 20s, those between 45 and 49 years of age and those 50 years of age or older were 64% and 49% more likely, respectively, to have an infant with a one minute Apgar score between 1 and 3. 
Fathers 45 years of age or older were at increased risk of having an infant with a five minute Apgar score of less than 7. 
"The biologic link between advanced paternal age and low Apgar scores is unknown," Sun and colleagues say. 
However, some studies have shown that "expression of specific paternal genes is crucial for the placental development and that chromosomal aberrations tend to increase with paternal age." 
Reproductive medicine expert Professor Robert Jansen from the University of Sydney says fathers aged over 60 are also more likely to have children with serious genetic defects.
"In really old men you start getting some rare conditions happening ... like dwarfism," he says.
Professor Mark Bowman, a expert in male infertility and lecturer in obstetrics and gynaecology at Sydney University says the results could be a reflection of maternal problems.
"You'd expect this would be a female effect," he says.
"Older women are more likely to have babies with problems and older women have older husbands."

Software that analyses how far your pupils dilate could be used to determine your age
The 'red-eye' reducing software inside digital cameras could one day be used to verify a person's age, US researchers say.
Andrew Gallagher, a senior research scientist at Eastman Kodak,  developed the technique, which has a range of applications.
Among them are face recognition security systems, age-progression software to identify missing children, and devices that determine whether a person is old enough to buy alcohol or cigarettes.
"We found that the features related to the red-eye artefact, the pupil dilation, are very good features to tell us how old someone is," says Gallagher, who recently filed a patent on the technology.
That's because as people age, the muscles in their eyes naturally weaken, making it more difficult for the eyes to dilate effectively in response to changing light conditions.
In fact, the dilation response goes down by a predictable number: about one millimetre for every decade a person is alive.
Eyes close together
But that's not the only predictable change in human eyes over time.
A baby is born with adult-sized eyes. Though eyes don't grow, the distance between them does.
Using this information, Gallagher built software that finds the red-eye artefact in an image and then, based on the distance between the eyes and how much the eye dilates, estimates the age of the subject.
Currently the software can categorise a person into general age groups such as baby, child, teenager and adult.
"It's very innovative; I've not seen it before," says Professor Tsuhan Chen, an expert in digital video and image processing at the Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.
"By itself, it's one way of recognising the age. Combining it with other techniques would be the final way to approach this."
In fact, Gallagher hopes to combine the red-eye feature with other face recognition techniques - such as determining the amount of hair, hair colour, and number of wrinkles - to better pinpoint age.
"The idea would be to put as many features together as possible, and that would give you the most accurate reading," he says.
Applications?
Don't worry. No one will be showing up at your next birthday party with a device that calls you a liar. In fact, Kodak has not yet incorporated this technology into a product.
According to Gallagher, it will mostly likely show up first as a way to organise and retrieve digital images.
Imagine calling up all of the images of your first baby, for instance. An internet version of such a system could be supported by links to advertisers selling age-related products, its developers say.

Banknotes and coins are home to fewer bacteria than we think
The long-held belief that you can catch disease from handling money may be exaggerated, says an Australian researcher.
A study by Dr Frank Vriesekoop, a lecturer in food science at the University of Ballarat, has found there are generally few pathogenic bacteria on banknotes and coins.
"The potential [to spread disease] is still there. But I don't think it's all as bad as it's made out," he says.
He will present the results of his study at the Australian Institute of Food Science and Technology annual conference in Adelaide today.
He will also tell delegates that his team found low levels of antibiotic-resistant bacteria on banknotes and coins.
Vriesekoop worked with New Zealand researchers from the Eastern Institute of Technology to look at the types and number of bacterial cells found on money on both sides of the Tasman.
The researchers analysed coins and banknotes from mainly small food outlets such as cafes, small supermarkets and shops like butchers and bakers, all places where the person who handles food is also likely to handle money.
Back in the laboratory, the researchers bombarded the coins with pulses of sound to dislodge any microbes on the surface. They then identified and counted the number of viable bacteria.
The researchers found few bacteria, typically 1 or 2 cells per square centimetre.
"Some batches appeared to be sterile," says Vriesekoop.
He suspects that the copper and nickel in the 20 cent pieces and the aluminium and bronze in the dollar coins are toxic to many bacteria.
The banknotes needed a different approach. They were placed in a device like a mini-washing machine that beats and swirls the notes in a special liquid. The scientists then analysed the liquid for microbes.
This time, the counts were higher, typically 10 cells per square centimetre and varied much more between samples.
Low levels
The researchers found a range of organisms on coins and notes, including those that cause food poisoning or diarrhoea.
These included low levels of coliforms such as Escherichia coli, bacteria typically associated with the colon and generally linked with poor hygiene; Staphylococcus aureus, a common organism with some strains that can cause disease in susceptible people; and Bacillus cereus, which causes food poisoning if cooking does not kill its tough spores.
But what surprised the researchers was evidence of salmonella bacteria. 
"It did worry me a bit," says Vriesekoop.
Also surprising was the number of bacteria that were resistant to one or more commonly prescribed antibiotics, like amoxycillin, roxithromycin and cefaclor.
"This was higher than I anticipated," he says.
Potential to cause disease?
While Vriesekoop says levels of bacteria were generally low, we still don't know how easily they are transferred from money to humans.
"Do they grow or die? We don't know," says Vriesekoop, adding that this might be the subject of future research.
He also hopes to work with the Royal Australian Mint to see how the raised surfaces of coins affect bacterial survival.
Vriesekoop is also co-ordinating an international comparison of bacterial levels on currency from the US, UK and Ireland.
The results, which he hopes to have at the end of the year, will help to confirm whether Australia's polymer notes are less hospitable to bacteria than paper notes used in most of the world.

A chip implanted in the brain records cell activity and sends commands to a computer
A paralysed man using a new brain sensor has been able to move a computer cursor, open email and control a robotic device simply by thinking about doing it, scientists say.
They believe the BrainGate sensor, which involves implanting electrodes in the brain, could offer new hope to people paralysed by injuries or illnesses. 
"This is the first step in an ongoing clinical trial of a device that is encouraging for its potential to help people with paralysis," says Dr Leigh Hochberg of Massachusetts General Hospital.
The 25-year-old man who suffered paralysis of all four limbs three years earlier completed tasks such moving a cursor on a screen and controlling a robotic arm. 
He is the first of four patients with spinal cord injuries, muscular dystrophy, stroke or motor neurone disease testing the brain-to-movement system developed by the company Cyberkinetics Neurotechnology Systems.
"This is the dawn of major neurotechnology where the ability to take signals out of the brain has taken a big step forward. We have the ability to put signals into the brain but getting signals out is a real challenge. I think this represents a landmark event," says Professor John Donoghue of Brown University and the chief scientific officer of Cyberkinetics. 
First, implant the chip
The scientists implanted a tiny silicon chip with 100 electrodes into an area of the brain responsible for movement. The activity of the cells was recorded and sent to a computer that translated the commands and enabled the patient to move and control the external device. 
"This part of the brain, the motor cortex, which usually sends its signals down the spinal cord and out to the limbs to control movement, can still be used by this participant to control an external device, even after years had gone by since his spinal cord injury," adds Hochberg, a co-author of the study published in the journal Nature.
Although it is not the first time brain activity has been used to control a cursor, Professor Stephen Scott of Queen's University in Ontario, Canada says it advances the technology. 
"This research suggests that implanted prosthetics are a viable approach for assisting severely impaired individuals to communicate and interact with the environment," he says in a commentary in the journal. 
Faster, faster
In a separate study, researchers from Stanford University describe a faster way to process signals from the brain to control a computer or prosthetic device. 
"Our research is starting to show that, from a performance perspective, this type of prosthetic system is clinically viable," says Stephen Ryu, an assistant professor of neurosurgery at Stanford.

Scientists are learning more about how baboons communicate and what this means for the evolution of human language
A study of how baboons gesture with their hands suggests gesturing may have been a precursor to human language, scientists say.
The findings could help to explain why humans often gesture with their hands, and particularly the right hand, when they speak.
The right hand is controlled by the brain's left hemisphere, which is the source of most linguistic functions.
Scientists believe communication by hand probably existed in apes 30 million years ago and was a forerunner to spoken and written language.
French researchers Adrien Meguerditchian and Professor Jacques Vauclair studied a particular hand gesture in 60 captive baboons. 
The gesture consists of quick and repetitive rubbing or slapping of the hand on the ground, and is used to threaten or intimidate others.
The researchers, from the University of Provence, say this motion "might be comparable in humans to the slap of ... one hand toward the palm of the other hand".
For the study, which is published in the journal Behavioural Brain Research, the researchers observed this gesture as it occurred naturally.
They also triggered it by having a human abruptly shake his head and then glance at a baboon. Head shaking is another threatening move in the ape and monkey world, which includes all sorts of communicative gestures.
"A nonhuman primate can effectively raise an arm to ask a social partner to groom it ... give another a little slap as an invitation to play, touch furtively the hand or genitals of another to greet it, slap the ground to threaten," the researchers say.
Right hand, left hand
Among the baboons in the test group that favoured a certain hand, 78% were right-handed and tended to gesture with this hand. Other studies have shown that most human babies and deaf individuals also communicate with their right hands.
"There is little chance that our [primate] cousins will evolve language skills in the near future," the researchers say.
"Monkeys and apes and their specific communication systems result from other evolutionary roads than those of humans ... It is very unlikely that the natural selection for primate species will reproduce exactly the same phylogenetic path that gave linguistic skills to humans."
Like chimps
William Hopkins, a US psychology professor at Berry College and an expert on the evolution of brain development in primates, says:
"I agree with the findings and think this is a very good and interesting paper. In many ways the results are nearly identical to those we have previously found in chimpanzees."
He explains that both chimps and baboons seem to use right-hand gestures for communication. This suggests the brain is asymmetrical when it comes to language, meaning that the left hemisphere tends to dominate.
"It will be interesting to see whether the asymmetries in hand use seen in the baboon link at all to brain asymmetries as we have found in the chimpanzees," Hopkins adds.

King penguins are keeping an eye on temperature and current flows in the Southern Ocean
Penguins and seals are swimming around the Southern Ocean with sensors superglued to their heads in the name of science, a conference will hear this week.
The animals are collecting data on water temperature and current flows, information that scientists will use to help complete global climate change models.
The research, by a team of scientists from CSIRO, the Australian Antarctic Division and the University of Tasmania, will be reported tomorrow at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart.
"We are using the penguins and seals as oceanographic observers," says team member Dr Steve Rintoul of CSIRO and Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems CRC.
The team has recruited 15 king penguins and eight elephant seals from Macquarie Island, which is about 1300 kilometres north of the Antarctic continent.
Sensors to measure temperature, pressure and location are superglued to the animals' heads along with a radio transmitter that sends data to a satellite throughout their journey through the Southern Ocean.
As the animals dive down to catch fish, 200 metres deep in the case of penguins and 1500 metres for seals, the pressure sensors tell the scientists how deep the animals are and helps provide a profile of the sea's temperature.
When they return to their home beach on Macquarie Island the animals moult and shed the equipment, which the researchers recover. 
Making up for a northern bias
Our current knowledge about ocean temperatures has mainly come from merchant ships in the northern hemisphere, says Rintoul.
The Southern Ocean has a lot less shipping traffic and so there are relatively few measurements of ocean temperatures there.
And this, says Rintoul, is the beauty of the penguin and seal oceanographers that swim to places that are hard for scientists to get to. 
They can also deliver many more measurements.
For example, a research vessel might deliver 150 temperature profiles in a six-week trip to Antarctica whereas the 15-strong penguin team delivers 36,000 profiles over their three-week journey.
The seals dive deeper but less frequently and deliver 16,000 profiles in a six month season.
One advantage of the seals is they are bigger than the penguins, which means they can carry more equipment. 
Specifically, seals carry sensors that measure salinity, which is important for understanding the density of the ocean and calculating the specific speed of currents.
Ocean currents the key
Rintoul, a physical oceanographer and climate scientist, says the project is looking at how currents distribute heat in the ocean, a key factor in understanding climate.
"And when the heat is released back into the atmosphere it affects the climate in that location," he says.
Measurements of the ocean temperature suggests that 84% of total heat increase of the Earth in the past 50 years has been stored in the ocean, says Rintoul. 
In particular, he is studying 'fronts'. These are areas of strong current within the gigantic Antarctic Circumpolar Current, which links all the world's oceans.
"They're like rivers in the sea," he says.
By comparing maps of penguin and seal tracks with maps of the fronts, the researchers found the animals like to feed near the fronts which make them perfect spies for scientists.

Bacteria remove gold from soil and deposit it on grains where they live, scientists say
Australian scientists have found the strongest evidence so far that bacteria play a key role in forming gold grains and nuggets.
They have found bacteria that remove gold from the soil and deposit pure grains of it around them.
Researcher Dr Frank Reith from the CRC for Landscape Environments and Mineral Exploration, and colleagues gathered their evidence at two separate mines and publish their results today in the journal Science.
At the Tomakin mine on the south coast of New South Wales and the Hit or Miss mine in tropical north Queensland, most gold is hidden away in quartz veins, in amounts that are invisible even to high-powered microscopes.
But the soil above the mines also contains grains and nuggets of gold that have somehow found their way out of the quartz. 
"There are a probably a lot of processes involved," Reith says.
He and other scientists have long suspected that bacteria play a part, but it's an idea that has generated some scepticism.
To test the theory, Reith sifted the soil above the mines and collected gold grains 0.l-2.5 millimetres across, and then subjected them to several experiments.
First, Reith looked at the grains under a high-powered electron microscope to confirm that they contained bacteria-shaped bubbles of gold.
"They're little lumps on the surface," Reith says.
Next, he looked for organic matter on the grains, as evidence that bacteria had been growing on their surfaces. 
Finally, he used a technique called polymerase chain reaction to look for bacterial DNA on the surfaces of the grains to show that living bacteria are still there.
"The DNA would have degraded if the bacteria weren't around any more," Reith says.
About 80% of the grains had living bacteria on them, Reith says. And the only bug that was found on all those positive samples was Ralstonia metallidurans.
"These grains come from areas that are almost at the opposite ends of Australia," Reith notes. "We were pretty happy with that."
Reith thinks the Ralstonia bacteria play an important role in the microbial ecosystem in soil, helping to rid it of the soluble gold that most other species find toxic. 
"This is the guy whose job it is to get the toxic gold out of the environment so the other bacteria can live a happy life," he says.
In the future, the gold-loving bugs could prove a boon to industry, Reith says. Perhaps they could be used to improve gold processing, or even be useful as a marker for the presence of gold that's otherwise invisible.

The researchers could not directly link smoking marijuana with lung cancer. But they found evidence of precancerous changes in the lung like oxidative stress, damaged tumour-fighting cells, and DNA and tissue changes
Smoking marijuana can cause changes in lung tissue that may promote cancer, according to a review of decades of research on marijuana smoking and lung cancer. 
Still, it is not possible to directly link pot use to lung cancer based on existing evidence. 
Dr Reena Mehra of Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio and her colleagues publish their review in the current issue of the Archives of Internal Medicine.
"Given the widespread use of marijuana, its use for what are believed to be medicinal purposes, and the increasing abuse and dependence on this substance, it is important to examine potential adverse clinical consequences," the researchers write.
To investigate whether marijuana smoking might lead to precancerous changes in the lungs or lung cancer, Mehra and her team reviewed 19 studies.
Analyses of sputum and lung tissue performed in some of these studies found more cancer-promoting changes in pot smokers than in cigarette smokers or non-smokers.
These changes included oxidative stress, dysfunction of tumour-fighting cells, changes in tissue structure and DNA alterations, the researchers report. 
But none of the studies they analysed found evidence that marijuana smoking actually caused lung cancer, after factoring in the effects of tobacco use. 
"We must conclude that no convincing evidence exists for an association between marijuana smoking and lung cancer based on existing data," Mehra and her team write.
Increased risk
Nevertheless, the researchers add, the precancerous changes seen in studies included in their analysis and other factors do suggest that smoking pot could indeed boost lung cancer risk.
Other factors that could make pot smokers prone to lung cancer, the researchers say, include the fact that they generally inhale more deeply and hold smoke in their lungs longer than cigarette smokers, and that marijuana is smoked without a filter.
It is known, they add, that marijuana smoking deposits more tar in the lungs than cigarette smoking does. 
The failure to find a marijuana-lung cancer link may have been due to methodological flaws in existing research, rather than the absence of such a link, the researchers say.
Doctors should advise their patients that marijuana does indeed have potential adverse effects, they conclude, including causing precancerous changes in the lungs. 
For more information about drugs and their side-effects, see the DrugInfo Clearing House website run by the Australian Drug Foundation.

Helper with 30-day-old pups
Meerkats actively teach their young how to catch and eat their prey, UK researchers say in a study that is one of the first to show such complex animal behaviour. 
While animals are known to learn from one another by watching, the team at the University of Cambridge says it has demonstrated that the animals actually teach, as defined by clear principles. 
Older meerkats will bite the stinger off a live scorpion and give it to a youngster to kill and eat.
And if the pup fails to do the job before the prey can crawl away, the older meerkats nudge it back, Alex Thornton and Katherine McAuliffe report. 
Older meerkats, not necessarily the parents, will watch youngsters to see how they are doing, the researchers report today in the journal Science. 
Meerkats are a type of mongoose and live in groups of three to 40 in dry regions of southern Africa.
Each group includes a dominant male and female who produce 80% of the pups, and older animals that help to watch over and rear the young. 
The animals rely on hard-to-catch prey such as grasshoppers and various species of scorpions, including poisonous ones. 
In the wild
The researchers watched 13 different groups of meerkats as part of the Kalahari Meerkat Project, in South Africa's Kuruman River Reserve. 
They used accepted criteria to define teaching: that an individual modifies its behaviour only in the presence of a naive observer, that the 'teacher' gets no benefit from its actions and in fact may lose opportunities to forage itself, and that the 'student' learns more rapidly than it would have on its own. 
"Teaching is ubiquitous in human societies, but although social learning is widespread in other species, it is not yet clear how commonly teaching is involved," the researchers write. 
The meerkats demonstrate clearly that they teach, and do not merely allow the pups to learn by observing, Thornton and McAuliffe say.
"A greater understanding of the evolution of teaching is essential if we are to further our knowledge of human cultural evolution and for us to examine the relations between culture in our own species and cultural behaviour in other animals," Thornton says.

The Larsen ice shelf, seen here collapsing in 2002, may be under greater threat from faster westerly winds over Antarctica
Heat-bearing westerly winds have picked up speed in the past 50 years are likely to be contributing to the melting of Antarctica's Larsen ice shelf, say scientists.
Meteorologist Professor John Turner of the British Antarctic Survey says the biggest change in the wind speed occurs in the southern hemisphere summer.
"The ice there [on the ice shelf] is melted most in summer and that is the season when the winds are increased," says Turner, who gave a keynote talk at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart this week.
Antarctica generally has lower temperatures and pressures than areas at more northern latitudes, like Australia. 
This differential generates storms that take warm air south and cold air north.
Turner says that over the past 50 years the differential appears to have increased, and this has increased the speed of westerly winds over the Southern Ocean by an average of a few knots.
The increase in speed means the westerlies are now blowing over the Antarctic Peninsula rather than around it, bringing destructive warm air onto the Larsen ice shelf to the east of the peninsula, says Turner.
He says the pick-up in the westerlies will also influence climate elsewhere on the planet by driving the Antarctic Circumpolar Current faster. The current shifts vast amounts of water and plays a major role in global heat transfer.
Beyond natural variability
While the pressure and temperature differential between Antarctica and more northern latitudes goes up and down in natural cycles, Turner says climate models suggest recent changes are "exceptional" when compared to the past 1000 years.
"What we've seen over the last 50 years is larger than anything in these models," he says. "That suggests that man is playing a part in this."
Turner says an increase in the speed of westerlies ties in with the prediction of more extreme storms in a warming world.
And he says models also support the idea that increasing greenhouse gases are causing the westerlies to increase, although exactly how they are doing so is not known.
Research on the increasing speed of westerlies and their role in melting the Larsen ice shelf is due to be published soon in the Journal of Climate.
Double whammy
Turner says the ice shelves are very sensitive to climate change because they have ocean beneath them and air above.
The warm westerlies blowing over their top and the warming oceans flowing beneath are "like a double whammy" for the ice shelves, he says.
Melting ice shelves in themselves don't affect sea level because they are already floating, but it's their role in holding back ice flowing from the main part of the peninsula that is in jeopardy.
"If you take away these ice shelves, the danger is the ice from the interior could start flowing faster," says Turner.
He says preliminary research suggests ice is already flowing off the peninsula faster than in the past.
Antarctica holds 90% of the world's fresh water in the form of ice, says Turner, and if all of this melted there would be a 65-metre rise in sea level. 
The current sea level is rising at 3 millimetres per year.

As long as water is good enough to drink, researchers say it's good enough to clean uninfected wounds
Medical workers in disaster areas no longer have to wait for sterile equipment before they clean and dress wounds, thanks to Australian research.
Professor Rhonda Griffiths, of the University of Western Sydney's Centre for Applied Nursing, says as long as water is good enough to drink, evidence suggests it will be good enough to clean uninfected wounds.
"We've demonstrated that some of the traditional ways of doing dressings are unnecessarily expensive and labour intensive," says Griffiths.
She adds that if there is any doubt that the tap water is suitable for drinking, it can be boiled before use.
Griffiths and colleagues recently completed a systematic review of evidence for the Cochrane Collaboration comparing the use of saline versus tap water to clean uninfected wounds. 
The review found that washing wounds, including leg ulcers, with water did not show an increase in infection or decrease in healing time, compared to using saline, she says.
As a result, the Cochrane Collaboration is now recommending tap water is used to clean wounds in developing countries and disaster zones, says Griffiths.
In the community
Community nurses, who treat people at home, first triggered the investigation into the use of tap water to clean wounds, says Griffiths.
While hospitals routinely use saline or sterilised water to clean uninfected wounds, community nurses have traditionally relied on people to simply shower before they dress their wounds.
"So in hospitals you had one practice," says Griffiths. "And the community had another."
Both practices were based on tradition rather than evidence, she says.
One of the studies included in Griffiths' Cochrane review was carried out by her team.
It was a six-week double blind, randomised controlled trial in southwestern Sydney that studied the healing and infection rate in 49 wounds of 35 patients washed with saline, compared with equivalent patients who were washed with tap water.
"We found that there was no difference," she says.
"That tells us that if you have got clean tap water that you can drink, it is perfectly safe to wash wounds with that tap water if those wounds aren't infected."
Griffith says the research is changing the way we think about managing some types of wounds.
"It's the cleanliness rather than the sterility [that's important]," she says.
Better for patients and cheaper
Griffiths says washing wounds with tap water would save money in hospitals, especially the cost of the disposable sterile equipment that is required when using saline.
Patients also prefer washing with water, she says, because they can get out of bed and take a shower.
While tap water may be safe and effective, Griffiths still wants to confirm the findings and find out if saline offers any advantages by carrying out a much larger randomised controlled trial.
She has applied for funding from the National Health and Medical Research Council to carry out a trial involving 400 wounds.

Seabirds, like this grey-headed albatross, can be caught as bycatch. But could a stinky repellent ward them off?
An old fishermen's remedy for preventing seabirds from becoming bycatch turns out to be true, according to a new study on the effectiveness of shark liver oil at warding off birds.
Using the stinky oil might help save seabirds, which often have fatal interactions with longline fisheries.
These fisheries use a line up to 100 kilometres long, often with additional branching lines.
Each line is rigged with hundreds or even thousands of barbed, baited hooks.
Seabirds, including some endangered species, often dive for the bait and fish. The birds can become entangled in the lines or injured, sometimes fatally, by the hooks.
Alex Aitken, a New Zealand fisherman for over two decades, uses the traditional shark liver oil as a deterrent.
Sharks themselves are bycatch in the snapper longline fishing industry, but government and industry regulations monitor their numbers in New Zealand.
Aitken drips the oil into water around fishing boats to deter the birds. In 2003, he entered his concoction in the SEO/BirdLife International competition for bycatch reduction. He won.
To test the oil, scientists Johanna Pierre of New Zealand's Department of Conservation and Wendy Norden of wildlife conservation group Audubon California conducted experiments off New Zealand's North Island. The seabird community there includes the endangered black petrel.
The researchers dripped the shark liver oil from a plastic container at the stern of their vessel, while they set out 200 baited hooks on lines.
As controls, they later conducted the same test using vegetable oil and seawater.
The shark liver oil did not affect fish catches, but it did dramatically reduce the number of times seabirds dived for the hooks.
For example, after nine minutes, only two or so birds went for the hooks when shark oil was present. Around 40 birds dived when seawater was used, while more than 50 took dives during the vegetable oil trial.
Pierre and Norden think the birds might even have been attracted to the vegetable oil, but the shark liver oil was a successful repellent.
Their findings are published in the July issue of the journal Biological Conservation.
"We are not sure what happens when the seabirds smell the oil," Pierre says.
"However, when the oil is released at the stern of the vessel, the effect ... is next to immediate. The birds disperse away from the vessel, sufficiently far that they can't be seen. One or two birds may come in from time to time and do wide looping flights around the vessel, but they typically don't land or stick around for long."
The repellent seems to have more to do with the noxious smell of the oil, or its consistency in the water, rather than the birds' fear of sharks.
"I think it's unlikely that they have a negative reaction to the smell of sharks per se. This is because the birds have no hesitation to eating shark livers when they are whole and they can also eat shark waste readily," Pierre explains.
The deterrent only appears to work as long as the dripping is continuous. Once the oil flow stops, Pierre says the birds "somehow cue into the fact that the vessel area is now attractive/interesting, not oily/nasty".
Though shark liver oil is a natural product, it may be problematic to introduce large amounts into marine environments.
Pierre and Norden hope the effective ingredients in the oil may be identified and isolated. It could be that these ingredients may be found in products other than shark liver oil, but this has yet to be determined.
In the meantime, the scientists suggest caution in using large amounts of the oil, and hope alternatives such as aerosol mists of the effective ingredients can be developed in the long run.

Can't a man pee in peace? Not in the US, where urinals are broadcasting public health messages
If you're a man and the urinal you're standing over is talking to you, one of two things is probably happening: you're really drunk or the owner has installed a talking urinal in the bathroom.
Let's say, for your sake, it's the receptacle. Then it must be the Wizmark Urinal Communicator, a waterproof, disposable drain cover embedded with electronics that senses a visitor and then relays an audio message.
The device can be programmed to play anything from beer commercials to public service announcements promoting responsible drinking.
"It functions as a point of information and amusement for the male visitor," says its inventor Dr Richard Deutsch, a chiropractor and bioengineer, as well as the founder of US company Healthquest Technologies.
Deutsch conceived the idea while on a business trip in Washington DC. 
On a pit stop to an airport toilet, he realised that he was staring down at a drain for about the same length of time as it took to play a commercial.
He worked as an inventor for several years to develop and patent a prototype and about one year later was under way with mass production.
How does it work?
The communicator is a plastic device designed to fit over the drain of standard-sized urinals.
Not only does the device act as a deodoriser with a disinfectant base, it also contains a proximity sensor that detects someone approaching within about 30 to 60 centimetres.
A few seconds after detection flashing lights and a prerecorded audio announcement plays.
The device has a 9 centimetre diameter display area containing a lenticular screen that features multiple images or text that, as the person moves toward the urinal, appear to change from one graphic to the other.
Just in case you are drunk, the Wizmark doesn't want to let you get away without a warning. Aside from advertising, it's being used to tout anti-drink-driving, safe sex, and anti-drug messages.
Out in the field, erm, the toilet
Safety officials in Nassau County, New York, have already acquired 100 copies of the Wizmark, funded by fines from those caught driving while intoxicated, as part of a pilot program to be distributed free to bars, clubs and restaurants.
"This is perfect for the target audience we try to reach all of the time and have difficulty doing it," says Joanne McGarry, the coordinator of Nassau County's anti-drink driving program.
McGarry is asking participating store-owners to fill out a questionnaire about the Wizmark, to gather information about its usefulness.
Deutsch is also working with various states and their associated health agencies on devices featuring cartoon characters or sports heroes to promote anti-drug messages in schools.

The large ground finch (Geospiza magnirostris) competed with its smaller-beaked cousin for food. But that balance changed once the climate shifted, triggering rapid evolution
A Galapagos finch that helped reveal the origins of species to Charles Darwin has now undergone a spurt of rapid climate-driven evolution, biologists report.
The medium ground finch (Geospiza fortis), of Daphne Island was nudged, and then shoved, to evolve a smaller beak.
This happened by the combination of competition from another finch that arrived on the island more than 20 years ago and more recent drought conditions.
"It happened very fast," says biologist Professor Peter Grant of Princeton University.
He and Dr Rosemary Grant publish their discovery in the latest issue of the journal Science.
In fact, it happened in a single bird generation, Grant explains.
The evolutionary nudging began when some larger finches settled on Daphne during an exceptionally wet El Ni&ntilde;o in 1982. 
In the years since, the larger G. magnirostris finches have been eating most of the larger, thorny seeds of the island's puncture vine plants and steadily pushing the smaller finches to rely on smaller seeds from other plants.
As a result, G. fortis birds with smaller beaks that did not compete with the larger birds did better, and were more likely to have offspring. That essentially enriched the gene pool with small beak genes and led to more G. fortis with smaller beaks.
But the matter really came to a head in 2003 and 2004, when little rain fell on the island and seeds of any kind were scarce.
"Most of the birds that had large beaks before the drought disappeared," says Grant. That included almost all of the recently arrived G. magnirostris and any remaining G. fortis with especially large beaks.
The only birds that survived enough to mate and produce offspring in 2005 were the G. fortis with smaller beaks and an ability to exploit small seeds like those of the drought-tolerant Optunia cactus.
In Darwinian jargon, the small-beaked birds were naturally "selected" for perpetuating the species, just as a dog breeder might select for speed in a greyhound.
"For years, this has been the classic textbook example of rapid evolution," says Professor David Skelly, an ecologist and researcher of rapid evolution at Yale University, referring to the competitive pressure on G. fortis by the larger beaked G. magnirostris.
"When I was a student, [Grant's] work was sometimes taught as the exception to the rule," says Skelly.
That is, normally evolution is thought of as slow and gradual in large animals like fish, birds, reptiles and mammals.
Beak sizes changing measurably in just decades seems awfully fast. 
The Galapagos finches were considered an extreme case of quick evolution caused by an extreme environment.
"Now it appears that the Grants' work shows a pattern that is likely to be widespread," says Skelly, who has studied rapid evolution of amphibians in response to global warming.
"Environmental changes severe enough to cause sharp population declines, as seen with the finches, are also selection events."
As more and more species undergo the stresses of climate change, more cases of rapid evolution can be expected, Skelly says.
It's not likely to save most species facing the climatic bottleneck, of course, but it does give a few a fighting chance, he explains.
It's not unusual
"I don't think there is any reason to suspect this is an unsual occurrance," says Australian biologist Professor Richard Shine of the University of Sydney.
Shine has charted the rapid evolution of longer legs in invasive cane toads in Australia, as well as adaptive changes in native snakes where the toads have invaded over the past few decades.
We'd see more evidence of rapid evolution if there was more support for long-term field studies like that of the Grants' 30-year work on the finches, he says.
"It's incredibly difficult to maintain these long-term studies."

Implanting false memories can have health benefits like preventing alcohol abuse. But is it ethical to brainwash people?
Implanting false memories of a bad experience with alcohol could prevent people abusing alcohol in later life, a Canadian researcher says.
Dr Dan Bernstein from Kwantlen University College, shows that if people are led to believe they once drank themselves sick it can affect their taste for a particular drink.
He presented the unpublished research, conducted over the past year, at the 4th International Conference on Memory in Sydney today.
In the study 142 people aged 18-20 were told they had had a bad past experience with alcoholic drinks including rum.
"We wanted to know whether there were consequences to false memory and we looked at whether we could increase people's confidence that they got sick drinking rum some time in their past," Bernstein says.
"What we find is that if you've increased your confidence that you've got sick drinking rum, you now give rum less preference."
Rewriting the past
Participants' memories were manipulated by telling them that a computer had generated a personal profile based on a questionnaire about past eating and drinking habits.
They were told they had become sick on rum in the past and they were asked to elaborate on that experience.
About a quarter of the participants became more confident that they had actually been sick on rum.
"We find that between 30 and 40% increased their confidence for the critical item in comparison to a control group," he says.
When they were asked to rate how much they liked rum they rated it less highly than before their memories were manipulated.
Ethical issues
Bernstein says if it can be shown that implanting false memories can have a long-term effect on putting people off certain alcoholic drinks it could be a useful deterrent to alcohol abuse.
"If we showed that it had a lasting behavioural effect then it could possibly have some preventative utility, but that's a long way off," he says.
Professor Mike Toglia, a US expert in false memories from the State University of New York, who wasn't involved in the research, says Bernstein's work offers a new application for this field of memory research.
He acknowledges there are ethical issues about brainwashing.
"There's always been the concern that implanting false memories is a form of brainwashing and some people believe that maybe this kind or research should be stopped for that reason," he says.
"But I think the good that can be done can outweigh the risks."
Beating obesity
Manipulating memory could also be used to prevent overeating, Bernstein says.
But prior bad experiences don't create an aversion to all foods and drinks, Bernstein says, only those with a distinct or unusual flavour.
"With some drinks and some food you may have got sick but it doesn't seem to have this imprint, this lasting effect," he says.
He says his previous research managed to induce an aversion to strawberry ice cream, but didn't work so well when it came to chips. 
"We couldn't turn them off potato chips," he says.
"In fact we got a little rebound and they thought 'give me more!'"

Ahh, I remember this ...
Songs we hear as teenagers tend to remain lifelong favourites because they become hardwired into our memory during a critical time, a memory conference has heard.
That critical time is known as the reminiscence bump, says Steve Janssen, a PhD student at the University of Amsterdam.
Janssen presented his research into how we form memories of our favourite music, books and movies at the 4th International Conference on Memory in Sydney this week.
He says the reminiscence bump can be partly explained by what's called differential encoding, or an ability to store events better during early adulthood.
"You recall more memories from the period of 10 to 25 [than previous or subsequent periods] and the bump has a peak between 16 and 20," he says.
"The brain works at its optimum in that period. It's a sponge and it soaks up everything."
We also learn languages and musical instruments best during this time.
But attachment to songs isn't all about the reminiscence bump, he says.
We also form a particularly personal connection with music from our teen years because we tend to listen to the same songs over and over, his research indicates.
What's your favourite?
Janssen found that when asked to rate their three favourite records, movies and books, participants in his study overwhelmingly chose items they listened to, watched or read between the ages of 16 and 21.
While music preferences were strongly linked to the reminiscence bump, favourite books and movies were more likely to have been read or viewed recently.
This is because we usually only read books once or twice, and see movies a handful of times, but can be exposed to the same song many times, he reasons.
"All distributions showed a reminiscence bump so there's evidence that people store events better in their teens," Janssen says.
"However, I also found a larger recency effect for books and a larger reminiscence bump for records ... so I suggest a kind of interaction between those two mechanisms.
"The results suggest that differential encoding initially causes the reminiscence bump, but resampling strengthens the bump."
Janssen's presention was based on data gathered through an online survey between January 2005 and April this year.
He analysed results from 1500 participants around the world with an average age of 36, including 23 Australians.
You can participate in the study here.

The epicentre of the 7.2-magnitude quake, south of the Indonesian island of Java
At least 105 people were killed when an undersea earthquake unleashed huge waves on the Indonesian island of Java, echoing the devastating 2004 Asian tsunami, the Red Cross said today. 
After a strong 7.2-magnitude quake convulsed the seabed off Java's south coast, waves up to 3 metres high wrecked buildings and sent boats crashing ashore, prompting thousands of residents to flee in panic. 
Tsunami alerts were issued for parts of Indonesia and Australia, but they did not reach the victims, as there was no early warning system working in the disaster zone, according to an official at the geophysics agency in the capital Jakarta. 
"There are 105 people dead from 10 regencies, 148 people are injured and 127 still missing," says Putu Suryawan, the official at the Indonesian Red Cross disaster centre, adding that 2875 people had been displaced from their homes.
"Possibly this number could rise because many people are still missing." 
At least five aftershocks rattled the area after the quake, which hit around 3:19 pm local time on Monday (08:19 UTC), with the epicentre in the sea off Pangandaran southeast of Jakarta, according to Indonesia's seismology centre. 
Indonesia was the nation hardest hit by the devastating December 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, which killed around 220,000 people across the region.
"We still don't have a tsunami early warning system in place," says an official at the geophysics agency in Jakarta.
Indonesia's 17,000 islands sit on the Pacific 'Ring of Fire', where the meeting of continental plates causes high volcanic and seismic activity. 
Both the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in Hawaii and the Japan Meteorological Agency issued tsunami alerts for parts of Indonesia and Australia after the quake hit. 
A tsunami warning was also issued by local authorities for India's Nicobar islands, but no immediate damage was reported there or in Australia. 
Police on Christmas Island, an Australian territory south of Indonesia, say there was no damage there.

Surgical staff leave behind a sponge or scalpel in one in 10,000 operations. But new technology may change that
Surgeons may be able to use radio-tag technology to detect sponges they've inadvertently left inside their patient, a small US study suggests.
Researchers at Stanford University School of Medicine tested sponges embedded with radio frequency identification (RFID) tags that were left in eight patients having abdominal or pelvic surgery.
Doctors and nurses then waved a detector wand over the patients, which beeped when it found the sponges.
The wand detected the tagged sponges every time, in an average 3 seconds. There were also no false alarms, when the device bleeped but there was really no sponge there.
But the researchers say the system is still prone to error, especially if people wave the wand too far away from the body, or don't scan the correct part of the body.
The study is published this week in the Archives of Surgery.
Alex Macario, a physician and professor of anaesthesia who led the study, says the future will probably see a combination of tags and other techniques such as counting instruments and sponges before and after an operation.
"We need a system that is really fail-safe; where, regardless, of how people use this technology, the patient doesn't leave the operating room with a retained foreign body," he says.
An earlier study found that medical personnel left foreign objects, most often sponges, inside a patient's body in one out of every 10,000 surgeries causing complications and even death. 
RFID tags are used commercially for uses ranging from tracking luggage and preventing currency from being counterfeited to preventing shoplifting to collecting road tolls.
The study was funded by the National Institutes of Health and by a grant from the Small Business Innovation Research Program, using sponges developed by ClearCount Medical Solutions in Pittsburgh. 
Macario has no financial interests in that company but two of the study's co-authors own several patents related to tagged sponges and work for the Pittsburgh company.

If you're confronted with a familiar situation that seems oddly unrecognisable, you could be suffering from jamais vu
The first scientific study of jamais vu, the reverse of d&eacute;j&agrave; vu, has shown that the experience exists and can be induced, an international memory conference has heard.
Jamais vu literally means "never seen" and describes the sense of unfamiliarity in the face of very familiar things or situations, says UK researcher Dr Chris Moulin of the University of Leeds.
"If you stare at a word, for instance, it loses its meaning," says Moulin, who adds that an estimated 60% of people have experienced jamais vu.
He presented his research for the first time at the 4th International Conference on Memory in Sydney this week.
Jamais vu is the opposite of d&eacute;j&agrave; vu, or "already seen", which is a sense of familiarity about an unfamiliar object, or the feeling that "I've been here before".
"Musicians can get [jamais vu] in the middle of playing a familiar passage. It's the sensation where you wake up in the morning and turn to the person next to you and feel that they're a stranger," says Moulin.
"[It can also occur] when you look at a face for too long and it begins to look strange, or when you're in a familiar place but think 'I don't know where I am', for a brief, fleeting moment."
Jamais vu was first recognised about 100 years ago when it was regarded as something of a "gentleman's intrigue", Moulin says.
But it has never been systematically studied in a laboratory until now.
Brain fatigue
Moulin says his study shows it's possible to induce jamais vu by what's known as semantic satiation, which occurs when the brain becomes fatigued in a specific way.
He asked 92 subjects to write common words such as "door" 30 times in 60 seconds.
When they were later asked to describe their experiences, 68% showed signs of jamais vu.
For example, after writing "door" over and over again some participants reported that "it looked like I was spelling something else", it "sounded like a made-up word" and "I began to doubt that I was writing the correct word for the meaning".
Some thought they had been tricked into thinking it was the right word for a door.
"If you look at something for long enough the mind gets tired and it loses it's meaning," Moulin says.
Moulin says studying jamais vu will help researchers better understand psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia or Capgras delusion, where people believe someone they know very well has been replaced by an impostor.
"It suggests that this is the normal process that might go wrong in these people, they might just have chronic jamais vu," Moulin says.
His latest research aims to induce jamais vu and monitor what actually goes on in the brain using neural imaging.

So, tell me about yourself ...
If you go out on a first date with someone and they only tell you good things about themselves it's not because they're being dishonest. They've genuinely repressed their bad points, a memory conference has heard.
Celia Harris, an Australian PhD student at the University of New South Wales, has demonstrated that when we're courting a romantic partner we are likely to remember only the good things about ourselves while forgetting the bad.
Harris asked 86 male and female subjects to imagine they were going on a date and to list 10 positive and 10 negative things that they would recount about themselves.
"We asked them to think, you're going out with this person you've really liked for a long time, you want them to think you're funny, smart, clever, a nice person, so try and come up with things that would impress them," she says.
Positives included getting on well with their mothers, having lots of friends and helping elderly ladies carry bags.
Negatives included getting falling-down drunk, failing exams or getting into fights.
Accentuate the positive, eliminate the negative
After completing a series of tasks and undergoing a brief distraction period they were asked to recall all the negative and positive points about themselves.
While the participants remembered all the positives, they struggled to remember all the negatives.
Harris says her study demonstrates our uncanny ability to selectively forget certain things if we have a motivation, such as impressing a new love interest.
"It confirms that motivation drives what we remember and forget," she says.
"It supports the idea that there are selective phases of autobiographical memory [and]  
depending on the situation we'll facilitate certain memories for retrieval and inhibit or block the retrieval of others."
Her study is reported in a poster presentation at the 4th International Conference on Memory held in Sydney this week.
Choosing what to remember
Harris based her study on retrieval-induced forgetting, which says that repeated recall of certain items can impede our ability to remember others.
Participants were split into two groups, with one required to concentrate on five negative points in their list and the other asked to concentrate on five positive points.
While the positive group remembered all their positive memories, the negative group forgot half the negative.
This demonstrates that positive memories seem to be protected against retrieval induced forgetting, Harris says.

Tsunami-hit Pangandaran beach.  The death toll rose towards 300 on Tuesday after a strong undersea earthquake triggered a tsunami that smashed into fishing villages and resorts (Reuters/Dadang Tri)
Indonesians fleeing this week's tsunami that lashed the south coast of Java had no warning, with a countrywide early warning system not due to be in place until 2009, officials say.
Plans for such a system in Indonesia were drafted in the wake of the devastating 2004 Asian tsunami, but only two out of 25 planned sensor buoys have been deployed so far, off Sumatra, not Java, officials say. 
"Our system is not yet working properly. We are still developing a communication system especially for the regions," says Fauzi, an official working on the early warning project from the meteorology agency in Jakarta.
He says only two sensor buoys were in place on Sumatra but that nothing had yet been installed off Java. 
Edi Prihantoro, from Indonesia's Ministry of Science and Technology, says even those two sets of buoys and ocean-bottom pressure sensors, activated off western Sumatra last November by Indonesian and German scientists, were not working. 
"According to a grand scenario we will have up to 25 buoys that can monitor ocean phenomena, but until now we have deployed only two buoys. They have some problems and are on land," he says. 
The system was slated to be in place by the end of 2008, he says. 
A lack of funds to buy and maintain the buoys was delaying the implementation of the system, he says, arguing that not only Indonesia should pay for its upkeep. 
"We still are discussing budget and maintenance. But I think other countries must also be taking care of it. They get all the ocean data from us, it seems unfair if they don't take responsibility for that," he says. 
Prihantoro says the German and Chinese governments had so far donated funds for the system but that it would be expensive to set up across Indonesia.
If installed as planned, buoys along Indonesia's vast archipelago working in conjunction with more than 100 seismographs would detect the speed of seismic waves to determine whether there was a risk of a tsunami. 
Data would be analysed and relayed automatically through mobile phone text message or email to officials who could then inform residents. 
But getting the message through to them could still prove a challenge.
Even if Java had had a system in place on Monday, it is doubtful many of the small fishing villages along Java's south coast would have received any SMS warnings as mobile reception is limited and many people are too poor to own phones. 
"It is not enough to warn people through TV and radio. The problem is direct communication to communities on the ground," says Fauzi. 
He says the most direct way to alert residents would be sirens on beaches. 
"This year we will build three siren systems in Aceh, West Sumatra and Bali. We will build one in Java next year," he says. 
Indonesia sits on the so-called Pacific Rim of Fire, where the meeting of continental plates causes high volcanic and seismic activity. 
It lacked a warning system when a massive quake hit off Sumatra on 26 December 2004, unleashing a tsunami that swept up to 7 kilometres inland and killing some 220,000 people in 11 countries around the Indian Ocean.

In less than 15 generations, more than half the population of England had Anglo-Saxon genes
The Anglo-Saxons who conquered England in the 5th century set up a system of apartheid that enabled them to master and outbreed the native British majority, according to gene research. 
In less than 15 generations, more than half of the population in England had the genes of the invaders, investigators say. 
"The native Britons were genetically and culturally absorbed by the Anglo-Saxons over a period of as little as a few hundred years," says Dr Mark Thomas, a University College London biologist. 
"An initially small invading Anglo-Saxon elite could have quickly established themselves by having more children who survived to adulthood, thanks to their military power and economic advantage. 
"We believe that they also prevented the native British genes getting into the Anglo-Saxon population by restricting intermarriage in a system of apartheid that left the country culturally and genetically Germanised," he says. 
"This is what we see today, a population of largely Germanic genetic origin, speaking a principally German language." 
Thomas believes the study, published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B, answers key questions about one of the turning points in European history. 
What happened after the Romans?
The Anglo-Saxons, Germanic tribes who lived in present-day Germany, northern Holland and Denmark, invaded Britain in 450 AD after the fall of the Roman empire.
They conquered England but were unable to penetrate far into the Celtic fringes of what are now Wales and Scotland. They coincidentally prompted an exodus of Britons to what is now Brittany, France.
The population of England at that time was probably around two million while the number of Anglo-Saxons was minute: the lowest estimate puts the number of migrants at less than 10,000 some 200 years after the invasion, although others put it at more than 100,000.
How could such a tiny minority have ruled a country so emphatically? How could it skirt assimilation with the native British majority and impose a language, laws, economy and culture whose stamp is visible today? 
The answer, suggest Thomas and colleagues, is an "apartheid-like social structure" that enshrined Anglo-Saxons as the master and the native Britons (called "Welshmen", from the Germanic word for slave) as the servants. 
Historical evidence
Evidence for this comes from ancient texts, including the laws of Ine, the late 7th century ruler of Wessex, an Anglo-Saxon kingdom in western England. 
Ine set down payments of 'wergild', or blood money, that was payable to a family for the killing of one of its members in order to prevent a blood feud. 
If an Anglo-Saxon was killed, the wergild was between two and five times more than the fine payable for the life of a "Welshman" of comparable status. 
Burial sites also provide a pointer about economic and social disparity. 
The skeletal remains of men believed to be Anglo-Saxons are often found alongside a weapon or other precious artefacts, whereas those of native Britons are usually weaponless and have only one or two objects. 
In previous work, Thomas' team compared the gene pool among native, white Englishmen in central England today and counterparts in the ancestral lands of the Anglo-Saxons. 
They found that the two groups shared between 50 and 100% of telltale variations in the male sex chromosome Y. 
Genes to map growth and decline
In the latest research, he used computer simulations to try to explain how segregation would have enabled the Anglo-Saxons to flourish and the native Britons to decline. 
The computer model uses various scenarios involving the size of the immigration influx, different ethnic intermarriage rates and the reproductive advantage of being Anglo-Saxon, with more wealth and resources. 
Apartheid is best known today for the notorious racial segregation that prevailed in white-minority South Africa. 
But the authors point out that there are many other examples in history, when conquerors or settlers used such controls to avoid assimilation, nurture their identity and maintain their political, military or economic supremacy over an ethnic majority. 
By the time of King Alfred the Great in the 9th century, the differences in legal status between Anglo-Saxons and Britons had faded out altogether. 
Two centuries later, the Normans invaded England and imposed their own apartheid, giving themselves higher legal status than the Britons and allowing Norman men to marry native women but preventing native men from marrying Norman women.

Sunlight can be a scarce commodity in Antarctica and that's affecting vitamin D levels in some researchers
Scientific researchers spending winter in Antarctica might be at increased risk of osteoporosis unless they take vitamin D supplements, new research suggests.
A pilot study presented last week at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart, suggests some researchers who spend the winter in Antarctica have low levels of vitamin D, which is making their bones weaker.
"Their bone may resorb more calcium and get weaker which can lead to a potential increase in osteoporosis in the long term," says researcher Dr Jeff Ayton, chief medical office of the Australian Antarctic Division.
Vitamin D is a hormone produced by the action of solar ultraviolet radiation on the skin and is essential for a number of processes including bone metabolism.
Lack of exposure to sunlight decreases vitamin D synthesis and increases bone turnover and bone loss.
Ayton says expeditioners who spend the winter in Antarctica have very little exposure to sunlight for seven to nine months.
But in summer they are at high risk of sunburn unless they cover up with hats and sunscreen.
Ayton and colleagues studied the vitamin D levels and skeletal response to sunlight deprivation in 57 healthy adults (with an average age of about 38 years) during their winter in Australia's Antarctic program.
Participants were also followed up after leaving Antarctica and returning to a more temperate climate.
Bone resorption, but not formation, was elevated during the period of sun deprivation, Ayton and colleagues report.
But they have yet to determine the long-term effect on bones, such as the increased risk of osteoporosis.
It may be that researchers need to receive supplements of vitamin D, says Ayton, or screened for vitamin D levels before they head south.
Ayton says medical researchers are concerned that many people in the general population may have subclinical vitamin D deficiency depending on the latitude of where they live. 
And he says the lower acceptable limit of vitamin D may be revised upwards.
"It may increase from the current level of 25 nanomols per litre to a higher level," he says.

Antarctica is a land of extremes and researchers need time to adapt when they get there and when they return
Flying from Antarctica to Australia will get polar expeditioners home much faster than by ship, but with less time to adjust to everyday life after months of extreme conditions, say researchers.
Dr Jeff Ayton, chief medical officer of the Australian Antarctic Division in Hobart, says research on Australian soldiers during the Vietnam War suggests that a quick plane trip back could increase the challenge of adjusting to normal life.
"We know that Antarctica is a stressful environment," says Ayton, who adds that researchers can spend as long as 15 months there.
"It's characterised by isolation, confinement and extremities of conditions such as cold, darkness and lightness."
Antarctic life also has its own rhythm which is a fair bit slower than life at home.
He says that it is normal for returning Antarctic researchers to use their long ship voyage back home to reflect on their time there and what lies ahead of them.
"A ship voyage normally takes eight to 10 days, if you don't get stuck in the ice for six weeks," says Ayton.
"We have a psychologist on board to debrief wintering parties," he says. "But that is going to change when we start flying people back in four hours."
Ayton and researchers from the University of Tasmania are studying the effect of air travel to and from Antarctica as part of a larger study on factors that affect the ability of polar expeditioners to reintegrate after their research trips.
The three-year study will use the introduction of the air link in 2007/8, approved in last year's budget, to compare the impact of ship and air travel on journeys to and from Antarctica.
"With the change of logistics from ship to air we need to gain an understanding of whether that will make a difference to the reintegration," says Ayton.
He says it might be necessary for researchers to see a psychologist before they get on the plane and to get more help once they are at home.
Resilient personalities?
Ayton and colleagues are also trying to find out if researchers and their families or significant partners back home have particular psychological 'resilience' characteristics that may make reintegration more successful.
Such positive personality traits may also help researchers adapt better to the Antarctic environment in the first place.
Problems adapting to Antarctic life include sleep disturbances, fatigue, lack of motivation as well as depressive or manic tendencies that can lead to conflicts with others in the group, severe problems with work or, in the worst case, suicide. 
The research by Ayton and colleagues was presented last week at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart.

Ethiopia, showing the East African rift system in the green area, and the southern end of the Red Sea above it
The two mighty tectonic plates that form Africa and Arabia are slowly ripping apart, scientists report, potentially shifting the southern end of the Red Sea.
As a result of this long-term split, the northeast of Ethiopia and Eritrea will be torn from the rest of Africa and may eventually form a huge new sea, they say.
An international team of geologists reports its study today in the journal Nature.
Geologists from the UK, US and Ethiopia monitored an earthquake and volcanic eruption in Ethiopia in September 2005.
The event, in the Afar desert at the southern end of the Red Sea, yielded only small amounts of volcanic material but was hugely significant in terms of geological movement, the geologists report. 
Using images supplied by the European Space Agency's Envisat satellite and deploying positioning sensors and seismic instruments, the geologists were able to get a rare first-hand look at the event. 
An 8 metre rupture developed in the ground in the Afar's Dabbahu volcanic massif over a period of just three weeks, and swiftly filled up with molten rock. 
The movement jostled the jigsaw puzzle that makes up the East African rift system, a Y-shaped fault whose stem comprises the Great Rift Valley and whose two branches comprise the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden. 
The East African Rift valley is an active divergent rift valley, one of the few areas on Earth where a continent is being actively separated or rifted by the ongoing forces of plate tectonics.
The rifting process has been going on for 30 million years and will take millions more to complete. 
The big rip of 2005 has no precedent in the era of satellite monitoring, which gave the experts this opportunity. 
They theorise that the well-known segmentation of continental rifts is caused by incursion of magma into the rip, rather than by step-by-step cracking of the surface crust.

Antarctic octopuses, seen here, gave rise to deep sea relatives
Colder Antarctic waters drove the evolution of deep sea octopuses, suggests new research.
Australian researcher Dr Jan Strugnell of Queen's University Belfast and the British Antarctic Survey says the formation of ocean currents around the continent millions of years ago provided the right conditions for ocean creatures to evolve.
She presented her research on octopus evolution last week at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart.
Previous research suggests a range of deep sea creatures had their origins in Antarctica, says Strugnell.
"People have thought for lots of different taxa that maybe this has happened, but no-one's really investigated it properly."
Strugnell decided to test the theory by studying the evolution of Antarctic and deep sea octopuses.
She constructed a family tree by comparing the octopus DNA and morphological features, including number of suckers.
Using fossils to calibrate evolutionary dates, Strugnell says Antarctic octopuses and their relatives evolved around 48 million years ago. 
And her findings so far suggest deep sea octopuses evolved from Antarctic octopuses some time after 34 million years ago. 
Strugnell has supported her findings using evidence from a completely different source.
Continental confirmation
At various stages in Earth's history, for example 100 and 60 million years ago, global climate change depleted oxygen in the deep sea and all the animals there went extinct.
Strugnell says the evolution of octopuses in the deep sea would only have been possible once those waters became oxygenated again and Antarctic octopuses were able to colonise them.
Evidence for the timing of this comes from the movement of the continents, says Strugnell.
About 34 million years ago, Antarctica separated completely from South America, with the opening up of Drakes Passage.
This allowed the Antarctic Circumpolar Current to form, which insulated the continent and allowed it to get really cold.
As cold water is more oxygen rich than warm water, oxygen from Antarctic waters would have been able to then diffuse into the deep seas along with Antarctic octopuses, which then evolved into deep sea octopuses.
"The opening of the Drakes Passage fits in with evolution of the group," says Strugnell.
She says it's early days but she is confident about her findings.
"This is still a work in progress but the evidence is looking good, halfway through my post doc."
Parts of her research have been published in the journals Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution and Cladistics.

Our ability to count emerged in stages, linguists say. The latest evolutionary stage allowed us to name lanes on a racetrack 1, 2 and 3 as well as describe which runner came in 1st, 2nd or 3rd
We can thank our verbal nature, along with our fingers, for the ability to develop complex number systems, a new study suggests.
The authors theorise that language and maths co-evolved in humans, with language probably emerging just ahead of basic mathematical concepts.
"I do not think counting words were among the first words spoken by our species, because their application makes use of a fairly sophisticated pattern of linking that occurred ... relatively late in linguistic evolution," says author Dr Heike Wiese, whose study has been accepted for publication in the journal Lingua.
Wiese, a linguist at the University of Potsdam in Germany, says that our use of counting words, and numbers in general, probably emerged in four stages.
During the first stage, Wiese believes humans began using visual representations, such as symbols or other markings, to correspond with verbal indications of quantity.
Among the early evidence for that stage is a 30,000-year-old wolf bone, excavated in the Czech Republic, with notched tallies cut into it.
The second stage of development, according to the new study, was the evolution of finger counting.
Our hands are like a built-in abacus: the physiology that allows us to bend fingers individually also allowed the emergence of our ability to count in sequence.
During the third stage, Wiese thinks emphasis began to be placed on the last word or finger in a counting series.
This emphasis seems to be inherent to human thinking. For example, when a child who is learning to count is asked how many teddy bears he or she has, the child gives the whole sequence of numbers and then puts emphasis on the last word, as in, "I have one, two, three, four teddy bears."
Since humans have 10 fingers, that number became a natural transition point during this stage, allowing people to count upward in sets of 10.
Finally, Wiese believes "a full-blown number concept" emerged in humans with the use of stable word-lists linked to amounts. Counting words and numbers, he says, do not merely refer to numbers. They are the numbers.
"The idea is that numbers are not some abstract platonic entities that must be grasped by us, but mental tools that we develop ourselves: tools we use to assess properties like cardinality (four buses), rank (the fourth bus), and identity (the number four bus)," he says.
Counting words and mathematical concepts, therefore, are intertwined with our language skills, and even appear to be dependent upon them. Though the reverse is not the case.
Some cultures, such as the hunter-gatherer Piraha of the Amazon, have language but do not even possess systems for numbers or counting.
Professor Terrence Deacon, a linguist at the University of California at Berkeley, agrees with many of the conclusions of Wiese's study.
"Wiese builds the case for numerical cognition growing out of the symbolic cognition at the base of language - not as a parasitic spin-off, or a mere naming of numerical concepts, but as an ability whose roots extend to the same underlying cognitive operations," he says.
Several recent studies support the language-maths link.
In a study published last month in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Professor Yiyuan Tang and colleagues found that Chinese and English speakers not only have different ways of representing numbers with language, they also think about numbers with different parts of their brains.
Yet another study, conducted by Miami-Dade County Public School researchers in Florida, found that bilingual individuals do better at maths than their monolingual peers.

But the impact of racist stereotypes on gamers can be hard to measure, say some critics
Some popular video games promote racist, negative stereotypes of Asians that would be unacceptable in other forms of media, says a Canadian researcher. 
Robert Parungao, who studied the topic as part of his honours degree in sociology at the University of British Columbia, looked at four best-selling games: Kung Fu, Warcraft 3, Shadow Warrior and Grand Theft Auto 3.
Parungao, an avid gamer, says the games feature evil gangsters, all of them non-white, who "function as narrative obstacles to be overcome, mastered or ultimately blown to smithereens by the white hero". 
He says while blatant racism is not tolerated in mainstream films or television, in video games "it's below the radar". 
Parungao says his study has had a mixed response. 
"Some say [racist stereotypes in games] is terrible," he says. "Other people in the games community say, 'Lighten up, it's a game, you don't have to worry about political correctness.'" 
A fifth-generation Canadian of Chinese and Filipino ancestry, Parungao says that with video game sales at about US$30 billion worldwide, making them more popular than movies, negative stereotypes matter. 
He admits that not all games, or game publishing companies, promote such stereotypes, but says racism is rife among many of the most popular games, which are designed and published mostly in the US and Japan. 
"These aren't just kids' toys, these are representative of our society and they teach us," he says. 
Parungao's study is one of the first to look at racism in video games, says Associate Professor Richard Smith, a specialist in technology and society at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver. 
"We've heard about sex and violence, but I can't remember hearing about racism in video games," says Smith.
"The most insidious thing about racism is when people accept it. Studies like this help create consciousness." 
But Smith cautioned there's no academic consensus that violence and sexism in media affects real-world attitudes, and says the impact of racist images will be hard to measure. 
"This is new territory," says Smith.

The pharmaceutical industry wants changes in how early-stage clinical trials are run
