As a result of surging demand and disruption to its reproductive cycle, catches of this species have fallen by three-quarters in the past 30 years, according to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization. 
The price of Japanese eel has soared over the past decade, prompting importers to turn to cheaper European eels to meet demand. 
In turn, this has encouraged dangerously unsustainable catches of European elvers, known as 'glass eels' because they are transparent for the first few years of their life.

Racalibration of the Earth's radiocarbon clock is changing what we know about when early humans colonised Europe
The ancestors of modern humans moved into and across Europe, ousting the Neanderthals, faster than once thought, a new analysis of radiocarbon data shows. 
Rather than taking some 7000 years to colonise Europe from Africa, the reinterpreted data shows the process may only have taken 5000 years.
Professor Paul Mellars from the University of Cambridge publishes his results today in the journal Nature. 
"The same chronological pattern points to a substantially shorter period of chronological and demographic overlap between the earliest ... modern humans and the last survivors of the preceding Neanderthal populations," the professor of prehistory and human evolution writes. 
The reassessment is based on advances in eliminating modern carbon contamination from ancient bone fragments and recalibration of fluctuations in the pattern of the Earth's original carbon 14 content.
University researchers have, for example, found better ways of preparing bone collagen for analysis. This involves a process of ultrafiltration, which removes contaminants with a lower molecular weight, such as organic salts and humic acids.
And taking into account the carbon signature of deep-sea sediments and ice cores, has allowed researchers to recalibrate radiocarbon ages.
Taking over the world
Populations of anatomically and behaviourally modern humans first appeared in the Middle East some 45,000 years ago and slowly expanded into southeastern Europe. 
Previously it was thought that this spread took place between 43,000 and 36,000 years ago.
But the re-evaluated data suggests that it actually happened between 46,000 and 41,000 years ago, starting earlier and moving faster. 
"Evidently the native Neanderthal populations of Europe succumbed much more rapidly to competition from the expanding biologically and behaviourally modern populations than previous estimates have generally assumed," Mellars writes. 
He says the invasion could have been helped by a major change in the climate that modern man would have been technologically and culturally better equipped to deal with than the more primitive Neanderthals. 
"There are increasing indications that over many areas of Europe, the final demise of the Neanderthal populations may have coincided with the sudden onset of very much colder and drier climatic conditions," Mellars writes. 
"This could have delivered the coup de grace to the Neanderthals in many parts of western and central Europe in their economic and demographic competition with the incoming modern groups," he adds.

Scientists have pinned down the genes responsible for the type of starch found in wheat
Researchers are making high-fibre wheat using gene silencing technology, but hope to use old-fashioned plant breeding methods to bring it to market.
They have used a genetic modification (GM) method known as RNA interference, or RNAi, to identify the genes responsible for high fibre.
But rather than marketing such a GM wheat, they plan to select for plants with the right genetic make up and breed them the conventional way.
Scientists from Australia's CSIRO and the French-based agricultural biotechnology company Biogemma UK report their findings today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.
RNAi is a way of changing the expression of particular genes in plants, says author Dr Matthew Morell, a geneticist from CSIRO's Food Futures National Research Flagship.
The technology involves inserting a fragment of DNA into the wheat, a fragment similar to one of the plant's own DNA sequences.
This triggers the plant's defence system to search out and destroy the resulting RNA used to make a particular enzyme.
Usually, this enzyme would convert the starch molecule amylose to amylopectin. But if the gene that produces that enzyme is 'silenced', the wheat is higher in amylose.
Wheat higher in amylose is harder to digest, which makes it healthier, the scientists say.
It lowers the rate of blood sugar uptake and increases the passage of fibre into the large bowel, potentially reducing the risk of developing obesity, diabetes and bowel disease.
There are a number of enzymes that convert amylose to amylopectin and one of the important parts of the research was to identify the critical enzyme that needed to be silenced to give wheat with high-amylose starch.
The scientists did this by silencing a number of different enzymes in wheat, then testing the resultant starch. 
Rat tests
The team then fed the GM wheat to rats and compared its impact to that of standard wholemeal wheat. 
They report that the rats fed the GM wheat had more bowel contents and a lower bowel pH, indicating better gastrointestinal health.
The rats' faeces also had increased levels of short-chain fatty acids, which have been associated with a lower risk of colorectal cancer, the researchers say.
And, says Morell, the high amylose content of the wheat means it is potentially another tool for managing our diet's glycaemic index or GI.
The old-fashioned way
The team is not developing high-amylose GM wheat. Rather, it is using the information gained in this experiment to develop an equivalent non-GM variety.
"People, particularly in our major export markets, are still not accepting GM technology," says Morell. 
"So the major international wheat producers - countries like Australia, the US and Canada - are not willing to risk those markets at the moment by having GM crops."
The research so far has told the team the genes that are important in creating a high-amylose wheat. 
This will give them a shortcut to breeding a new variety using conventional breeding methods.
A technological shortcut
He says the new breeding program is already well under way but the details of when the new variety will be ready are commercial-in-confidence.
The technological shortcut, which cost several million dollars to research, will save decades in developing a high-amylose wheat variety, says Morell.
Without RNAi, which CSIRO developed about five years ago, scientists would have had to find and combine nine different very rare mutant wheat varieties, he says.

Ecstasy use has risen 70% between 1995 and 2000, says the UN
Ecstasy, the drug that some doctors blame for depression and anxiety, may often only enhance these symptoms rather than cause them, according to a study published today. 
Dutch researchers found that children who suffered from depression were more likely to go on to use the illegal drug when they grew up to make them feel better. 
The appearance later in life of mental health problems in these people might not therefore be primarily due to their use of ecstasy, but could reflect pre-existing conditions. 
"Using ecstasy may increase a risk that is already there," says Anja Huizink, assistant professor at the Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, author of the study that appears in the British Medical Journal today.
"Other studies claim that ecstasy leads to depression," Huizink says. "Sometimes that is the case. But perhaps it is more the case that individuals who already have an increased risk for depression are more likely to use ecstasy." 
Clubbers
Ecstasy, methylenedioxymethamphetamine or MDMA, was used in the 1970s to treat depression.
It helps the body to relax, reduces inhibitions, increases energy and brings feelings of euphoria.
The drug is now used by millions of young people around the world, especially clubbers who say it can help them dance all night. 
United Nations data suggests the use of ecstasy surged by 70% between 1995 and 2000. 
But ecstasy has increasingly been linked with health problems such as depression, especially where individuals have used the drug heavily over a long time.
The Dutch study of 1580 individuals over 14 years left open the possibility that ecstasy might cause depression in some cases.
"Perhaps for individuals who did not display symptoms of depression and anxiety in childhood, using a lot of ecstasy may also cause depression. We are not saying that is not the case, but we need more studies," says Huizink. 
More than a decade later
She and her colleagues first looked at their sample in 1983, before ecstasy appeared as a recreational drug in the Netherlands. Use of the drug was then assessed 14 years later. 
Individuals with signs of anxiety and depression in 1983 showed an increased risk of starting to use ecstasy. 
The researchers say other factors not tested in their study could account for some people to be more likely to use ecstasy. These included the social environment, novelty seeking and the substance use of parents. 
"Focusing on these vulnerable individuals in future studies will increase our insight into the potential harmful effects of MDMA," they conclude. 
For more information about ecstasy and other drugs, side-effects, and where to go for support or referral, see the DrugInfo Clearinghouse website, run by the Australian Drug Foundation.

Could the explosion be a new type of gamma-ray burst?
A new kind of cosmic explosion has been spotted in Earth's celestial neighbourhood, scientists report. 
The blast seems like a gamma-ray burst, one of the most distant and powerful type of explosion known to astronomers. 
But when scientists first detected it with NASA's Swift satellite on 18 February, the explosion was about 25 times closer and lasted 100 times longer than a typical gamma-ray burst. 
"This is totally new, totally unexpected," says Dr Neil Gehrels, Swift's principal investigator.
"This is the type of unscripted event in our nearby universe that we hoped Swift could catch." 
The explosion originated in a star-forming galaxy about 440 million light-years away towards the constellation Aries.
A light-year is about 10 trillion kilometres, the distance light travels in a year. 
This would be the second-closest gamma-ray burst ever detected, if indeed it is one. 
The burst lasted for nearly 2000 seconds, or about 33 minutes, astronomers say. Most bursts last a few milliseconds to tens of seconds.
The burst was also surprisingly dim. 
Scientists at Italy's National Institute for Astrophysics found hints of a budding supernova, an exploding star, when they saw the afterglow from the original explosion grow brighter in optical light. 
If it is a supernova, scientists will have an unprecedented view of one from start to finish. 
Scientists will attempt observations with the Hubble Space Telescope and Chandra X-ray Observatory.

Nicotine, suspected to come from cigarette butts, are among many chemicals vacuumed up in dust from Sydney's roads
Chemicals from car exhausts, asphalt and cigarette butts are covering our roads, an Australian study suggests.
And accumulated run-off may need to be treated as toxic waste, says researcher Associate Professor James Ball of the University of Technology, Sydney.
As well as raising environmental concerns, this finding may mean authorities will face increased clean-up costs, Ball says.
The researchers went out onto Sydney roads with a modified vacuum cleaner to suck up samples, the first study to look at polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and nicotine in road dust.
They found dirt blown in from many kilometres. And when the researchers analysed particles smaller than 200 micrometres in size, they identified 20 chemicals, including nicotine, plasticisers and PAHs.
"Nobody's gone looking for these before," says Ball, who has been studying pollution on road surfaces for the past 15 years.
Roads make up about one-fifth of the urban land area, he says, and about half the impervious surfaces.
He says any pollutants that fall on roads can easily wash off into the stormwater system with the slightest rain. 
Even small storms yielding 10 millimetres of rainfall can mobilise the dust, says Ball. The dust then enters the waterways, silting up creeks, ponds and wetlands.
In the dust
Nicotine, most likely from tossed away cigarette butts, is an alkaloid with a half-life in the environment of 30 days and can be toxic to aquatic organisms.
PAHs come from a range of sources including vehicle exhausts, asphalt roads and fires.
PAHs can accummulate in living tissue and some are carcinogens, says Professor Des Connell of Griffith University in Brisbane.
"[PAHs] will be taken up by fish and accumulate in fish," he says.
Ball also found many other previously reported pollutants in the dust, like phosphorous that leads to algal blooms.
And he found trace amounts of heavy metals such as lead and zinc from tyres, petrol and bearings; chromium from wear and tear on car bodies, and copper from brake linings.
"All of these are potentially hazardous," he says.
Cleaning up
Ball says the discovery of new pollutants on roads like PAHs has implications for authorities, which already have their hands full treating stormwater pollution.
"It expands the number of contaminants that we have to manage," he says.
And, he says, authorities may have to pay more attention to run-off from roads.
Currently, says Ball, authorities are focused on the immediate risk to humans from sewage contaminating stormwater systems, and the immediate risk to waterways from nutrients.
But, he says, the discovery of environmentally persistent chemicals in road run-off may mean areas receiving the run-off may eventually have to be treated like toxic waste.
Ball says he received funding from the New South Wales Environment Protection Authority (now the Department of Environment and Conservation ) and the Roads and Traffic Authority for his study, which is yet to be published.

This beaver-like mammal, Castorocauda lutrasimilis, would have taken a dip about 164 million years ago
Mammals took to water 100 million years earlier than anyone thought, say scientists after the discovery of a curious beaver-like fossil in China.
The animal lived 164 million years ago alongside dinosaurs, report US and Chinese researchers in the latest issue of the journal Science.
It had a flat paddle-like tail and webbed feet, resembling a beaver. And it had fur and even the inner ear structure of a mammal, the scientists say.
But it might have not gnawed trees as modern beavers do; its teeth suggest it ate fish.
Professor Thomas Martin of the Forschungsinstitut Senckenberg in Frankfurt, Germany, says the finding shows the diversity of early mammals.
"This exciting fossil is a further jigsaw-puzzle piece in a series of recent discoveries, demonstrating that the diversity and early evolutionary history of mammals were much more complex than perceived less than a decade ago," he writes in a commentary. 
The fossil was found in the Middle Jurassic Jiulongshan Formation in China, a deposit rich in the fossils of dinosaurs, early insects and other creatures that dates to 164 million years ago. 
Dr Qiang Ji and colleagues at Nanjing University in China and the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh say the animal, which they named Castorocauda lutrasimilis, would have weighed just 500 grams. 
"It is the most primitive taxon in the mammalian lineage known to have fur and has a broad, flattened, partly scaly tail analogous to that of modern beavers," they write. 
They found remnants of fur, scales on the tail and, in between the back toes, webbing.

An acidic burp can give you heartburn symptoms
Reflux doesn't have to be extremely acidic to give you that burning feeling, a new study shows.
In fact, burping can result in heartburn even when no liquid accompanies the gas up the oesophagus, Dutch researchers report. 
Dr AJ Bredenoord and colleagues from St Antonius Hospital in Nieuwegein, the Netherlands, report their findings in the latest issue of the journal Gut. 
The researchers monitored 32 patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD, who had stopped taking their acid-suppressing medication.
They were monitored for 24 hours using traditional pH testing as well as a technique called impedance. 
Impedance allows researchers to evaluate how far reflux extends up from the stomach, measure the volume of reflux, and evaluate acidity with greater precision.
"It's a completely new way of looking at reflux," Bredenoord says. 
The acid test
There were 1807 episodes of reflux, 203 of them causing symptoms. 
Episodes that caused symptoms showed a larger increase in acidity within the oesophagus, more acidity, and extended further up the oesophagus. 
The volume of reflux in heartburn-causing episodes was larger than for those that caused no symptoms, while the liquid also took longer to clear from the oesophagus. 
Nearly 15% of reflux episodes were caused by more weakly acidic reflux material. 
Just gas
The researchers also identified 426 gas-only reflux episodes, 12 of which caused symptoms.
Symptoms were more likely with gas reflux if they were accompanied by a rise in acidity. 
"[The findings show that] if you only focus on looking at whether these symptoms are related to acid, you will certainly miss a few patients who symptoms are also related to weakly acid reflux," Bredenoord says.
And volume of reflux, as well as its acidity, plays a role in whether it causes symptoms, he adds.
New drugs
He points out that some drug companies are developing medications designed to reduce the number of reflux episodes, rather than targeting acidity, as all currently available GERD drugs do.
This could be helpful for the minority of patients whose symptoms are due to more weakly acid reflux, he says. 
For more information on heartburn and reflux, see the consumer information section of the Gastroenterological Society of Australia website.

A watchdog would monitor research to make sure it wasn't used by bioterrorists, yet would allow legitimate research to continue. But not everyone agrees this balance is possible
A global watchdog is needed to prevent science being misused to produce biological weapons, say Canadian academics.
"Bioterrorists require darkness to succeed," says Professor Peter Singer, director of the Joint Centre for Bioethics at the University of Toronto, which has published a report calling for global network of experts to help spot any misuses of science for biological warfare. 
"In effect, we're calling for an IAEA of biotechnology," he adds, referring to the International Atomic Energy Authority, the global nuclear watchdog. 
"Not with a team of IAEA-type inspectors, though, but an expanding global network of scientists." 
The rationale behind the report, entitled DNA for peace: reconciling biodevelopment and biosecurity, is fear that there will be a crackdown on genuine scientific research in the name of biosecurity, an attempt to prevent biological warfare or deliberately created epidemics.
"The question is how do you create a system where people are talking in such a way that you can enhance the positive use of biotechnology and protect against the misuse of them in such areas as bioterrorism," says Elizabeth Dowdeswell, co-author of the report and the former head of the UN Environment Program. 
The scientists want the Group of Eight industrialised nations to help create the new watchdog, and they want investment in "positive applications" of biological sciences in developing countries. 
That would include efforts to cure or prevent disease, and to alleviate poverty, they say. 
But Dr Eike-Henner Kluge, an expert on bioethics and a professor at the University of Victoria in British Columbia, says a surveillance network is "pragmatically unrealistic".
He questioned who would monitor and pay for the proposed body. 
"How do you balance a possible negative threat on the one hand with a possible good on the other?" says Kluge. "This is the two-edged sword that accompanies any research."

Marmoset fathers gain weight while their partners are pregnant to prepare for their role as a new dad
Fathers of at least two primate species gradually gain weight during their mate's pregnancy, a new study has found.
Researchers observed this classic female pregnancy symptom in common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) and cotton-top tamarin (Saguinus oedipus) male primates.
They published their results in a recent issue of the journal Biology Letters.
The scientists suspect that males in most monogamous primates, including gibbons, some lemurs species and humans, also show signs of pregnancy when their mates are expecting.
While the new study represents the first evidence for gradual weight gain in non-human primate expectant fathers, earlier research found that 11-65% of all human fathers have experienced some symptoms of pregnancy.
The symptoms include weight gain, nausea, headaches, irritability, restlessness, backaches, colds, nervousness and hormonal changes, such as higher levels of the stress-fighting hormone cortisol and the strength-boosting hormone testosterone.
Previously it was thought that these were just psychosomatic symptoms. But for many such dads it is likely that the changes help them to cope with the rigours of fatherhood once the baby is born.
This is particularly important for the doting, yet squirrel-sized, marmoset and tamarin dads, whose job includes toting around their often hefty babies.
"Males do most of the carrying of infants - usually two - once they are born," says Dr Toni Ziegler, lead author of the study.
"The males invest highly in infant care, even losing weight while carrying these heavy, multiple infants through the trees," says Ziegler, a senior scientist at the University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Ziegler and her team obtained monthly weight measurements for 29 male marmosets and 29 male cotton-top tamarins. Of these monkeys, nine marmosets and 11 tamarins had pregnant mates.
The researchers determined that the expectant fathers experienced roughly a 10% increase in weight gain during their mate's pregnancy.
The extra weight, which was not associated with copied eating habits, occurred gradually over the gestation periods, which are five months for marmosets and about six months for tamarins.
The extra padding is not the only pregnancy symptom that scientists have identified in the monkey dads. The males apparently are so in tune with their mates that they undergo other physiological changes.
"We have found for cotton-top tamarins, that males show hormonal changes around mid-pregnancy and these changes may help prepare them for their role in infant care," Ziegler says.
"They also detect when their mate is going to ovulate and have an increase in testosterone a few days before she ovulates, so I think they are getting signals for the female at important reproductive events."
Hardly surprising
Brian Craft, lead keeper at Oakland Zoo in California, is not surprised by the findings.
Craft says most monogamous non-human primate dads have the following daily schedule: "feed, travel, rest and then more of the same, with just a little time in between for play."
"The weight gain could serve as a decoy for predation, but it more likely fortifies males, who have less time for foraging once the offspring are born. The changes, therefore, may benefit the entire family," he adds.

The length of a particular gene controls your risk of developing depression after divorce, unemployment or illness
More than a fifth of the population has a genetic predisposition to major depression triggered by a string of stressful life events, Australian researchers announce. 
These events include: the loss of a parent or other significant relative; a relationship breakdown; or employment, financial, housing and health crises. 
The study, published in the latest issue of the British Journal of Psychiatry, found a gene that controls the neurotransmitter serotonin is crucial.
The researchers found that people with a 'short' version of the serotonin transporter gene have an 80% chance of developing clinical depression if they have three or more negative life events in a year.
People with a 'long', or more protective, version of the gene only have a 30% risk of becoming depressed under similar circumstances.
The study, by researchers from the University of New South Wales with affiliated research institutes and teaching hospitals, evaluated the relationship between genes and life experience from young adulthood into middle age in 127 teachers across 25 years.
It is the first study to account for the timing of the first onset of depression across the lifespan.
The long and the short of it
'Short' and 'long' versions of the serotonin transporter gene 5-HTTLPR, located on chromosome 17, are created by a slight variation in the sequence of DNA.
One version of the gene is inherited from each parent in certain combinations. According to the research, those who inherit two short versions are the most susceptible to depression.
The study showed 21% of us have two short versions of the gene, 26% two long versions and the rest have one long and one short variant. 
Professor Philip Mitchell, head of the university's School of Psychiatry and convenor of Brain Sciences UNSW, emphasises that this is a susceptibility or risk gene not a disease gene.
"Having two short versions of the gene doesn't make you depressed per se; it increases the likelihood of becoming depressed if you experience stressful life events," he says.
Identifying who's at risk
Mitchell says the findings could help identify people at increased risk of depression and help direct resources into preventative interventions for people with the susceptible genetic make up.
"I think this will spark off important clinical debate about when tests like this should become clinically available," he says.
"The ethical question is not only whether this test should be made available publicly, but also who should have access to the results. We err on the side of privacy but private insurance bodies, for example, could demand the information as part of their risk assessment."
For information about depression, including support and referral options, see Australia's national depression initiative beyondblue, or depressioNet.

When Mount Tambora erupted in 1815, it killed 10,000 people instantly and buried the nearby village in volcanic debris
Scientists are unearthing the 'Pompeii of the East', an Indonesian village buried nearly two centuries ago by the largest volcanic eruption in recorded history.
Two years ago, a team of scientists including those from the University of Rhode Island and the Indonesian  Directorate of Volcanology and Geological Hazard Mitigation, began digging up the village of Tambora, which was buried by a volcanic eruption in 1815. 
The excavation shows how Tambora's 10,000 residents were killed in moments by an avalanche of hot volcanic ash, rock and volcanic gas known as a pyroclastic flow. 
The village was buried in 3 metres of volcanic debris. And in all, 117,000 people were killed.
The eruption was the largest in recorded history, says Haraldur Sigurdsson, a University of Rhode Island professor who has studied Tambora since 1986.
"Events of this type will occur in the future, and we should be aware of what could happen," he says. 
The eruption of Mount Tambora on Sumbawa island blew 200 times more magma and pulverised rock into the air than Mount St Helen's in the US state of Washington in 1980, according to Sigurdsson. 
Tambora's blast also sent sulfur dioxide 43 kilometres into the air, creating a chemical chain reaction in the atmosphere that caused a year of global cooling that made 1816 "the year without a summer". 
Scientists located Tambora with help from a local guide, who told them that pottery fragments and human bones had been found in a gully. In the mid-2004 dig, scientists discovered an entombed house with two people inside. 
One woman was found in the kitchen, her hand next to glass bottles that had been melted by the ash flow.
The house, on wooden stilts with bamboo siding and a thatched roof, had been incinerated into charcoal by the fiery ash that Sigurdsson believes was at least 538&deg;C. 
The finding is significant, Sigurdsson says, because "it means that we know that in an eruption such as that in 1815, that pyroclastic flows extend from the volcano in all directions to a distance of at least 40 kilometres radially and within that zone ... there is an extinction of all life." 
Scientists also studied the deposits of volcanic ash and documented the size of the particles and their distance from the volcano, says Steven Carey, a University of Rhode Island professor with a background in physical volcanology. 
The data can be plugged into computer models that will simulate volcano blasts and their potential fallout, he adds. 
The deposits are one factor used to determine Tambora's eruption rate, or how much content was spewed out of the volcano and how quickly. That, says Sigurdsson, will determine when relatively harmless fallout turns into deadly ash flow.

The Pinwheel galaxy contains one trillion stars
The largest and most detailed image of a spiral galaxy has been released, including surprising views of its star-forming regions.
The image is of the gigantic Pinwheel galaxy, or Messier 101, and was compiled from 51 images from the Hubble Space Telescope, with extra data from ground-based telescopes.
The image reveals a giant spiral disc of stars, dust and gas, some 170,000 light-years across, about twice the diameter of the Milky Way.
A high-resolution version of the image, which shows individual stars, is available on the Space Telescope Science Institute website.
The galaxy contains about one trillion stars, about 100 billion thought to be about the same age and temperature as our Sun.
Its spiral arms have large star-forming nubulae, star nurseries in hydrogen clouds. And bright young clusters of newborn blue stars trace out the spiral arms.
The disc of the galaxy is so thin, the researchers say, that Hubble easily sees many more distant galaxies through it.
The Pinwheel galaxy lies in the northern constellation the Great Bear and is about 25 million light-years from Earth.
The light we see from the galaxy today is as it was at the beginning of the Miocene period on Earth, when mammals flourished and the mastodon first appeared, the researchers say.
The composite image was compiled from images originally taken to study the expansion rate of the universe, star cluster formation, x-ray emissions and blue supergiant stars.

Inflammation after infection with the Epstein-Barr virus might trigger temporary brain damage
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) might be caused by a temporary 'brain injury' during the early, inflammatory stages of glandular fever, according to Australian scientists.
"We believe that parts of the brain which control perception of fatigue and pain are damaged during the acute infection phase of glandular fever," says lead researcher, Professor Andrew Lloyd from the University of New South Wales.
The researchers, who publish their study this week in the Journal of Infectious Diseases, believe the Epstein-Barr virus, which causes glandular fever, might trigger CFS in some people. 
While most people with glandular fever recover in several weeks, disabling symptoms including prolonged fatigue can last for at least six months, known as CFS.
The scientists found the virus itself does not cause this ongoing fatigue but they hypothesise that a 'hit and run' brain injury does. 
"If you're still sick several weeks after infection, it seems the symptoms aren't being driven by the activity of the virus in the body, it's happening in the brain," Lloyd says.
The study is the first to follow patients within a few weeks of acute glandular fever infection for a year.
It tracked 39 people including eight who were sick for at least six months, and 31 who recovered quickly.
Levels of virus in the blood were no different in patients who recovered quickly from those whose fatigue lasted more than six months.
"It's not the virus or an ongoing inflammatory response directed at the virus causing ongoing symptoms. But an inflammatory process in the acute illness might disturb brain function and make it stay symptomatic," Lloyd says.
The mystery of CFS
Lloyd says CFS affects one in 100 Australians and millions worldwide.
It is a group of symptoms for which there is no medical or psychiatric explanation including unrefreshing sleep, muscle and joint pain, concentration and memory difficulties and prolonged fatigue.
People with CFS are often unable to work or attend school.
Theories about causes range from muscle and immune system to psychiatric problems, hormonal changes and the growing body of data linking infectious diseases, including glandular fever, as a trigger.
The scientists will test their hypothesis by doing brain scans on study participants.
For more information on CFS, see the ME/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Association of Australia's website.

Australia's new chief scientist is a long-term advocate of GM crops
The position has been vacant for nine months. But Australia now has a new chief scientist whose appointment has been met with a spectrum of responses from unqualified support to downright disappointment.
Dr Jim Peacock, the 68-year old former chief of CSIRO Plant Industry and head of the Australian Academy of Science, was yesterday appointed as the Prime Minister's new part-time adviser on science and technology.
Peacock is still finalising his contract under which he will continue his role as a senior researcher at CSIRO.
He takes up the reins from the previous chief scientist, Dr Robin Batterham, who resigned amidst claims that his advice to government was influenced by the interests of resource and energy giant Rio Tinto, a company he worked for part time.
Peacock says he does not anticipate his dual role will result in any conflicts of interest, but some commentators say his impartiality may be questioned nevertheless.
GM advocate?
One issue is his ongoing support for genetic modification (GM) technology.
"It think the integration of these [GM] technologies into our agribusiness will be essential for the future," Peacock told ABC Radio today.
He acknowledges there are many concerns in the community about GM food and crops but hopes this will change as people understand the benefits of the technology.
Professor Ian Lowe, head of the Australian Conservation Foundation and emeritus professor at Griffith University, says it is appropriate that a distinguished scientist has taken up the role of chief scientist but foresees problems.
"He's been a long-standing advocate of genetic technology so he's not going to be seen as neutral in the discussions about that issue," says Lowe.
While Labor welcomes the appointment the Greens say they are "extremely disappointed" and see Peacock's advocacy of GM as "highly divisive".

In their lifetime, Western women will have four times as many periods as women from some traditional societies
Regularly skipping menstrual periods using methods including the contraceptive pill might help reduce the risk of some gynaecological cancers, a conference will hear next week.
Professor Ian Fraser, a professor of reproductive medicine at Australia's University of Sydney, says the fewer periods a woman has, the better.
The modern consequences of too much menstruation include breast, ovarian and endometrial cancers, endometriosis, uterine fibroids, polycystic ovary syndrome and severe cyclical menstrual symptoms, he will tell the Human Reproductive Health Through the Ages conference in Adelaide.
"The belief is regular menses means 'a good clean out' but having lots of periods is not a healthy process," Fraser says.
"In our society women have many more periods than in primitive societies and each menstrual cycle leads to big swings in the ovarian hormones oestrogen and progesterone."
Fraser says this overstimulates reproductive organs and the breasts.
"The uterus, lining of the uterus and breasts were not designed to cope with this and it causes some cells to grow and regress each month, which means a greater chance of error in the proliferation process of abnormal cells," he says.
"Breast cancer in our society is 100-fold greater than in primitive societies and having lots of menstrual cycles probably plays a role in that."
He says substantial increases in the risk of endometrial cancer occurs as the uterus lining grows and regresses each month and in ovarian cancer as ovaries grow and regress during egg release.
"My view is we probably have sufficient, strong, supportive anecdotal and suggestive evidence, although no solid long-term evidence, that for many women taking the pill or an intra-uterine device ... for extra years than they might have done for contraception may help later protect against a number of conditions."
Fraser says present day Kalahari bushwomen have about 100 periods in a lifetime compared with Western women's 450.
In our society, girls menstruate earlier and women have more periods before giving birth than women like the Kalahari.
Women from traditional societies breastfeed for extended times, often conceive soon after menses return, average five to six pregnancies and have an earlier menopause, all factors that reduce the number of periods they have in a lifetime.

Brain implants may turn sharks into underwater spies, says the US military
The Pentagon is funding research into neural implants with the ultimate hope of turning sharks into 'stealth spies' capable of gliding undetected through the ocean, a report says.
The research, outlined in this week's issue of New Scientist builds on experimental work to control animals by implanting tiny electrodes in their brain, which are then stimulated to induce a behavioural response. 
"The Pentagon hopes to exploit sharks' natural ability to glide quietly through the water, sense delicate electrical gradients and follow chemical trails," says the report.
"By remotely guiding the sharks' movements they hope to transform the animals into stealth spies, perhaps capable of following vessels without being spotted." 
The project is being funded by the Pentagon Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
Scientists involved in the scheme presented their work last week at a meeting on Ocean Sciences in Honolulu, Hawaii, the report says.
A team at Boston University has implanted electrodes into the brain of a spiny dogfish in a shallow tank. 
The implants, controlled by a small radio transmitter, stimulate either the right or left side of a brain area dedicated to smell, causing the fish to flick around in that direction in response to the signal. 
The next step will be to take this device outside the laboratory. Blue sharks implanted with the gadget are to be released off the coast of Florida. 
As radio signals will not penetrate the sea, communications with the fish will be made through US Navy acoustic towers capable of sending sonar signals to a shark up to 300 kilometres away. 
Other DARPA-funded researchers are working on using implants to record brain activity in sharks to understand which neurons are fired by scents, electrical or magnetic fields. 
These signals help the fish to navigate and offer the reward of food, and could thus in theory be manipulated for surveillance work. 
New Scientist says the DARPA work is controversial, but also points out that work with animal implants also has a potential benefit for medicine. 
Understanding more about the brain's electrical signals could one day result in implants to control a prosthetic limb to overcome paralysis, the report says.

Experts disagree about which of Shakespeare's portraits are real or fake and what we can tell about his health by studying them
William Shakespeare died in pain of a rare form of cancer that deformed his left eye, according to a German academic who says she has discovered the disease in four genuine portraits of the world's most famous playwright.
As London's National Portrait Gallery prepares to reveal in a show that only one out of six portraits of the Bard may be his exact likeness, Professor Hildegard Hammerschmidt-Hummel, from the University of Mainz, provides forensic evidence of at least four contemporary portraits of Shakespeare.
Hammerschmidt-Hummel, who will publish in April the results of her 10-year research in the book The True Face of William Shakespeare, used forensic imaging technologies to examine nine images believed to portray the playwright.
These technologies included the trick image differentiation technique, photogrammetry, computer montages and laser scanning.
Four of these portraits shared 17 identical features.
"The Chandos and Flower portrait, the Davenant bust and the Darmstadt death mask, all showed one and the same man: William Shakespeare. They depict his features in such precise detail and so true to life that they could only have been produced by an artist for whom the poet sat personally," says Hammerschmidt-Hummel.
The portraits show a growth on the upper left eyelid and a protuberance in the nasal corner, which seems to represent three different stages of a disease.
"At Shakespeare's time, the artists depicted their sitters realistically and accurately, absolutely true to life, including all visible signs of disease," Hammerschmidt-Hummel says.
A team of doctors analysed the paintings and concluded that Shakespeare, who died aged 52 in 1616, most likely suffered from a rare form of cancer.
According to ophthalmologist Dr Walter Lerche, the playwright suffered from a cancer of the tear duct known as Mikulicz's syndrome.
A protuberance in the nasal corner of the left eye was interpreted as a small caruncular tumour.
Dermatologist Dr Jost Metz diagnosed "a chronic, annular skin sarcoidosis", while the yellowish spots on the lower lip of the Flower portrait were interpreted as an inflammation of the oral mucous membrane indicating a debilitating systemic illness.
"Shakespeare must have been in quite considerable pain. The deformation of the left eye was no doubt particularly distressing. It can also be assumed that the trilobate protuberance in the nasal corner of the left eye, causing a marked deviation of the eyelid margin, was experienced as a large and painful obstruction," Hammerschmidt-Hummel says.
Her findings have stirred a controversy in England.
The National Portrait Gallery, which conducted a four-year study of possible surviving portraits for the exhibition Searching for Shakespeare, stresses that "today we have no certain lifetime portrait of England's most famous poet and playwright".
Hammerschmidt-Hummel's conclusion is based on a "fundamental misunderstanding" since "portraits are not, and can never be forensic evidence of likeness", the gallery says.
Most experts, including those at the National Portrait Gallery, agree that only the Chandos painting may be a likely Shakespeare portrait.
The terracotta Davenant bust, which has been standing for 150 years in the London gentleman's Garrick Club, has long believed to be work of the 18th century French sculptor Roubiliac.
Hammerschmidt-Hummel traced it back to the times of Shakespeare through the diary of William Clift, curator of the Royal College of Surgeons' Hunterian Museum in London.
She learned that Clift found the bust in 1834 near a theatre that was previously owned by Sir William Davenant, Shakespeare's godson. Davenant owned many Shakespeare mementos, including the Chandos painting.
It's a fake
The most controversial seems to be the Flower portrait, which the National Portrait Gallery dismissed as a fake as it featured a pigment not in use until around 1818.
Hammerschmidt-Hummel contends that the painting is nothing more than a copy of the portrait she examined 10 years ago. The original Flowers had evidence of swelling around the eye and forehead, while the one about to go on display at the gallery does not have these features, she says.
The Darmstadt death mask, so-called because it resides in Darmstadt Castle in Germany, has been long dismissed as a 19th century fake.
But according to Hammerschmidt-Hummel, the features, and most of all the impression of a swelling above the left-eye, make it certain that it was taken shortly after Shakespeare's death.
"A 3D technique of photogrammetry made visible craters of the swelling. This was really stunning evidence," Hammerschmidt-Hummel says.

Bounty Bay on Pitcairn Island shows the island's typical steep rocky shoreline
The original Polynesian community on the Pitcairn Islands died out because it lost touch with its neighbours who provided crucial resources, an Australian archaeologist says.
Dr Marshall Weisler of the University of Queensland will discuss his research on the reliance of Pitcairn islanders on the neighbouring Mangareva or Gambier islanders at a conference in Mexico later this year.
"[Pitcairn is] the kind of island that can only have people on it in the long run if it's being resourced from outside periodically," says Weisler, who has been studying Pitcairn since 1990.
"It wasn't sustainable in the long run because the trading connections between the Pitcairn group and Mangareva stopped."
The UK-governed Pitcairn Islands, are a group of four small rugged and relatively barren islands in a remote part of the western Pacific.
Today, they are home to a handful of descendants of Fletcher Christian who led the mutiny on the Bounty in 1789.
The two main islands in the group are Pitcairn and Henderson, which were originally settled in around 800 to 900 AD, he says, by "a couple of dozen" Polynesians from the neighbouring island of Mangareva.
But by the time the Spanish explorer Ferdinand Queros sailed by in 1606, the islands had been abandoned.
Surviving on Pitcairn
Weisler spent several months at Pitcairn to work out why.
He says archaeological evidence collected suggests early Pitcairn inhabitants ate seafood and seabirds such as the booby, and used earth ovens to cook.
He says they put a fair bit of pressure on the islands' resources. For example, some species of land birds went extinct during the occupation.

The near-Earth object known as 2004 VD17 may give Earth its closest shave, but not until 2102 when the risk of hitting the planet is one in 1000
A space rock capable of sub-continent scale devastation has about a one in 1000 risk of colliding with Earth early next century, the highest of any known asteroid, watchers say.
The rock, 2004 VD17, is about 500 metres long and has a mass of nearly a billion tonnes.
If it were to hit Earth, it would deliver 10,000 megatonnes of energy, equivalent to all the world's nuclear weapons. 
VD17 was spotted in late November 2004 and was swiftly identified as a rock that potentially crosses Earth's orbit. At the time watchers gave it one in 3000 risk of collision on 4 May 2102. 
Further observations and calculations have prompted the risk on that day to be upgraded to "a bit less than 1 in 1000", says NASA near-Earth object (NEO) expert Dr David Morrison.
"The risk of an impact within the next century [is] higher than that of any other known asteroid," he says, stressing however that the likelihood of a hit is small. 
"Fortunately, it is nearly a century before the close pass from VD17. This should provide ample time to refine the orbit and, most probably, determine that the asteroid will miss the Earth." 
VD17 was previously categorised as a grade green, which means merits careful watching, on the Torino scale of NEO hazards. But it has been upgraded to grade yellow, meaning meriting attention. 
There are two more grades beyond this, orange or close encounter, and red or collision is certain, involving objects capable of inflicting regional or global devastation. 
The asteroid's closest proximity to Earth on the 2102 flyby was not given by Morrison or the hazard list maintained by NASA and the US Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Biggest threat?
VD17's place at the top of the list was briefly snatched in December 2004 by a rock called 99942 Apophis. 
Further observations, however, downgraded Apophis' risk to a one in 5000 chance of collision, making it a grade green risk. 
Apophis, measuring 300 metres across and with a mass of less than 100 million tonnes, will fly by at a distance of 36,350 kilometres from the Earth's surface on 13 April 2029.
This is slightly higher than the altitude of geosynchronous satellites, according to the website of the International Astronomical Union's Minor Planet Center.

A floating iceberg off the Antarctic Peninsula
Antarctica's mammoth ice sheet is in "significant decline", scientists say, probably due to climate change. 
US researchers at the University of Colorado  at Boulder say online in the journal Science today the Antarctic ice sheet is losing up to 152 cubic kilometres of ice a year.
"This is the first study to indicate the total mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet is in significant decline," says Dr Isabella Velicogna, of the university's Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences. 
The team calculated that the ice sheet lost 152 cubic kilometres a year from April 2002 to August 2005, give or take 80 cubic kilometres.
This is equivalent to global seas rising 0.4 millimetres a year, with a margin of error of 0.2 millimetres, the researchers say.
The bulk of the loss is occurring in the West Antarctic ice sheet, according to Velicogna, whose team used two satellites orbiting Earth in tandem to gather data.
These satellites estimate Earth's global gravity field. And variations in the gravity field over time were used to determine changes in Earth's mass distribution, necessary for estimating changes in mass of the Antarctic ice sheet.
"The changes we are seeing are probably a good indicator of the changing climatic conditions there," Velicogna says. 
The study seems to contradict the 2001 assessment by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change which forecast that the Antarctic ice shelf would actually gain mass in the 21st century due to higher precipitation in a warming climate. 
The US researchers say the IPCC estimate was based on sparse coverage of coastal areas, which would have affected the results.
Twice the size of Australia
As Earth's fifth largest continent, Antarctica is twice the size of Australia and contains 70% percent of Earth's fresh water resources. 
The ice sheet is an average 1981 metres thick. 
Research from the British Antarctic Survey suggests melting of the West Antarctic ice sheet alone would raise global sea levels by more than 6 metres.

Up to 25% of a car's fuel goes on running the air-conditioning
The average family car may one day have fans built into the seats to cool you down as you drive, suggests US government research.
The cooled seats could also cut your fuel bill by more than 7%, say the researchers, fuel that would otherwise be used to run the car's air-conditioning.
"Ventilated seats keep drivers and passengers cooler, so they need less air-conditioning to be comfortable," says the research team, led by John Rugh at the US Department of Energy's National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
The researchers have been trying to reduce fuel consumption for air-conditioning in cars and trucks.
Using a mannequin that breathes and sweats, the researchers tested the effect of a specially constructed seat, containing two fans that pull air from the seat surface and out from underneath the seat.
Their mannequin, called ADAM (ADvanced Automotive Mannequin), together with physiological and psychological models, enabled the researchers to measure how the cool seats increases "thermal comfort" and reduces the need for air-conditioning.
"If all passenger vehicles had ventilated seats, we estimate that there could be a 7.5% reduction in national air-conditioning fuel use," the researchers say.
Real-world savings?
Australian engineer, Associate Professor Eric Hu of Deakin University in Melbourne, welcomes the research.
"Up to 25% of the engine power is used for air-conditioning purposes," says Hu, who works on reducing fuel use associated with vehicle air-conditioning.
While the cool seats might make people feel more comfortable, he doesn't think the researchers' estimate of a 7.5% reduction in fuel consumption will make much difference in the real world.
"Certainly savings are a good thing, but I'm not too sure you can say it's significant," he says.
Hu says it would be easy to achieve the 7.5% savings with good seals, which would prevent the loss of cool air from windows and doors.
And if people don't close their windows tightly, he says the 7.5% savings could easily be blown away.
But Hu says research like this is going in the right direction.
The amount of engine power used by air-conditioning translates to at least 25% of fuel use and 25% of emissions, Hu says. And until recently, he says, this problem has not been taken seriously.
For example, he says air-conditioning is not considered when the fuel economy of new cars is tested in Australia.
Driving uphill
Hu's current research, funded by the Australian Research Council and air-conditioning company Air International, is looking at how air-conditioning affects fuel use under different driving conditions.
For example, he has a theory that when a car full of passengers is driving uphill the engine can become overloaded and burn fuel inefficiently.
This means air-conditioning would use even more fuel and worsen pollution.
Hu is hoping to develop a smart energy management system for cars that could cut off air-conditioning when the car is going uphill and let it kick in when the car is going downhill.
"We want to co-ordinate the engine load and the air-conditioning load," he says. "Currently these two systems are not talking to each other."

The La Nia weather event, which brings higher rainfall to Australia, may be on its way. But the experts don't know how long it will last, or what its effects will be
La Ni&ntilde;a may be on its way, says the UN's weather agency, an event that tends to bring above-average rainfall to Australia and parts of Southeast Asia.
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) says it has seen unprecedented signs pointing to La Ni&ntilde;a, which originates off the western coast of South America but can disrupt weather patterns around the globe.
The Geneva-based agency says temperatures in the central and eastern equatorial Pacific have been between 0.5 and 1.0&deg;C below normal since the start of 2006.
"Combined with broader tropical Pacific Ocean and atmosphere conditions, this is consistent with the early stages of a basin-wide La Ni&ntilde;a event," it says.
"It is unprecedented in the historical record for a La Ni&ntilde;a of substantial intensity or duration to develop so early in the year." 
La Ni&ntilde;a, which has the opposite effects to the more notorious El Ni&ntilde;o, last occurred from mid-1998 to early 2001. 
Under La Ni&ntilde;a, the sea-surface temperature in the central and eastern tropical Pacific falls below normal.
This typically brings far dryer weather to the southwestern US, Florida and western Latin America and above-average rainfall to Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.
But there can also be a knock-on effect much further afield, with an increase to monsoon rainfall in South Asia, unusual coolness in tropical West Africa, Southeast Africa, Japan and the Korean peninsula.
La Ni&ntilde;a usually lasts nine to 12 months, although "some episodes may persist for as long as two years", according to the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Hang on a minute
But the WMO sounds a note of caution. 
The build-up of this La Ni&ntilde;a is so exceptionally swift and intense that it is impossible at the moment to infer what the impact would be, and how long the phenomenon would last, it warns.
"Most models and expert interpretations favour the event dissipating quite rapidly over the next three to six months," it says.
"Nonetheless, neither a continuation of La Ni&ntilde;a beyond mid-year, nor the development of El Ni&ntilde;o in the second half of 2006, can be ruled out as possible outcomes from the current prevailing situation." 
El Ni&ntilde;o, which last ran from 2002 to 2003, occurs when warm water builds up in the western tropical Pacific and creeps eastwards, again causing huge disruption to classic patterns of rainfall and wind. 
Both El Ni&ntilde;o and La Ni&ntilde;a are naturally occurring cycles, although there is much speculation among climate scientists that human induced global warming may make them more frequent and more vicious and that this trend may have already started. 
El Ni&ntilde;o means 'the little boy' in Spanish. Its name is attributed to fishermen off the coast of South America who noted the appearance of warmer water, often around Christmas. La Ni&ntilde;a means 'the little girl'.

Golf is hard enough to play well on Earth. So how is a Russian cosmonaut going to hit a ball into the right orbit in space?
A Russian cosmonaut plans to whack a golf ball into orbit from the International Space Station, a publicity stunt that critics say would add to the growing problem of space junk.
Pavel Vinogradov is to take on the role of a celestial Tiger Woods under a deal between a Canadian golf club manufacturer and the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency.
In one of three space walks planned from the International Space Station over the next six months, Vinogradov will climb aboard a special platform and swing a special gold-plated six iron and seek to enter the record books for the longest-ever golf drive. 
If all goes well, and NASA, the prime agency in building and running the space station, approves, his ball will orbit the Earth for about four years.
It would travel up to 3.36 billion kilometres before eventually burning up upon friction with the atmosphere. 
"Every single record for distance in the golf industry will be shattered," says Element 21 Golf Co, the Toronto firm behind the scheme. 
The ball will be fitted with a small radio transmitter allowing golf fans to track the ball on their home computer, says the company, which says it will give the club to charity. 
Scientists, though, are less than gleeful. They say, in theory, it should be easy to hit the ball a huge distance.
After all, US astronaut Alan Shepard exulted that his two historic 1971 golf shots on the Moon, where gravity is a sixth of the Earth's, went "miles and miles and miles". 
On the space station, orbiting the Earth at a height of some 350 kilometres, gravity is negligible and friction is zero, which should make it a golfer's dream. 
Taking a shot
But, as experienced golfers will tell you, driving that little white ball with the right force and in the right direction is a lot harder than it seems, even on a terrestrial course. 
The task is that much harder in a thick spacesuit, which leaves little room for a decent swing or flexing the joints. 
The ball thus could quite easily be mis-hit and travel only a couple of metres, or be hooked or sliced and sent in entirely the wrong direction.
As a result, it could accidentally land in the same orbital plane as the space station. Station and ball would both whizz around the planet on the same track, one after the other. 
And what that means is a remote risk of a collision, capable of damaging or even destroying the space station, depending on the angle, velocity and site of impact.
"There's a lot of room in space, but orbital mechanics is a wonderful thing, and things tend to come back to where you launched them from," says Dr Heiner Klinkrad, acting head of space debris at the European Space Agency. 
"For the [space station], the most probable collision velocity in the worst-case scenario is somewhere at 10 to 11 kilometres per second," he says. 
"This thing is certainly larger than a centimetre, which means it would certainly penetrate the shields of the space station if it hits at this speed." 
The perfect swing
Dr Jean-Michel Contant, secretary general of the International Academy of Astronautics, a Paris-based forum on space research, suggests that Vinogradov's boots be strapped to the platform and that he make a few practice swings on a tethered ball before doing the big drive. 
"If safety criteria are respected, this exercise could be useful as a teaching tool for children and students and be fun for the broad public," he says. 
"But it holds out no scientific benefits ... and if the worst-case scenario happens, it won't be fun at all." 
Another problem is that of space junk, especially from exploded satellites and boosters, which is becoming a threat to satellites and travellers. 
"The international recommendations are that you should not throw out unnecessary objects, and I wouldn't qualify a golf ball as a mission-related object," Klinkrad says. 
Junk in space
The junk region of most concern is between 900 and 1000 kilometres above Earth, where there are many navigation, communication and  weather satellites. The golf ball would be far below this height. 
Dr Bill Ailor, a director of the Center for Orbital and Reentry Debris Studies at The Aerospace Corporation in El Segundo, California, told New Scientist magazine there are about 300 operational satellites in this low-orbit zone. 
These could in theory be at risk from the ball as it slowly spirals towards Earth.
"But the chance of something like that happening is probably very low," says Ailor.
A NASA spokesperson says its engineers are vetting the planned golf drive for safety but was unable to say when this review would be completed.

New Zealand fruits, like fruits of the swamp maire shown here, are rich in antioxidants, scientists are finding. This may help to explain low levels of infectious disease in pre-European Maori people
Plants traditionally eaten by Maori people are the world's richest source of antioxidants, New Zealand scientists show.
"Until now blueberries have been regarded as the 'king of the antioxidants', the best source of antioxidants in a Western diet and the standard by which they're measured," says Associate Professor Kevin Gould of the University of Otago.
"But almost half the plants we tested had concentrations many times higher," says Gould, who measured levels in both native and introduced plants.
Puha, a plant similar to watercress and still commonly eaten by Maori people, has over three times the concentration of antioxidants of blueberries, and New Zealand honeysuckle 10 times.
But the fruit of the Syzygium maire or swamp maire tops the lot, with 18 times the concentration.
The study, published in the New Zealand Journal of Botany, opens up several exciting avenues for further research, Gould says.
"It may account for the low incidence of non-infectious disease in pre-European Maori. Even now Maori are less at risk from colon and rectal cancers than New Zealanders of European descent," he says.
"But it may also reflect the way New Zealand plants are responding to global warming and other environmental stresses."
Plants are particularly susceptible to stress from too much ultraviolet (UV) radiation; because of the hole in the ozone layer above Antarctica, New Zealand has one of the highest levels of UV radiation in the world.  
Under stress
All organisms produce free radicals when they are stressed. Normally the organism can deal with them by producing its own antioxidants to mop up them up. But too many antioxidants can cause damage.
"A free radical is an unstable molecule that behaves irrationally," says Gould.
"It's a bit like a jilted lover, bent on revenge, wanting to attack the first thing it sees. It's unstable because it's lacking an electron, or it's got too many, so it just wants to grab one from anywhere, including the tissue from your lung or your bowels."
Finding plants with such high concentrations of antioxidants may prove doubly beneficial, the researchers say.
They are potentially rich sources of dietary antioxidants and could provide a better understanding of how plants respond to environmental stress.

The Sun's next active period could by twice as energetic as the last one
Sun-spawned cosmic storms that can play havoc with earthly power grids and orbiting satellites could be 50% stronger in the next 11-year solar cycle than in the last one, scientists say.
Using a new model that takes into account what happens under the Sun's surface and data about previous solar cycles, astronomers say the next cycle could start as soon as this year or as late as 2008.
They offer no specific predictions of solar storms, but they hope to formulate early warnings that will give power companies, satellite operators and others on and around Earth a few days to prepare. 
"This prediction of an active solar cycle suggests we're potentially looking at more communications disruptions, more satellite failures, possible disruptions of electrical grids and blackouts, more dangerous conditions for astronauts," says Dr Richard Behnke of the Upper Atmosphere Research Section at the National Science Foundation. 
"Predicting and understanding space weather will soon be even more vital than ever before," Behnke says. 
The prediction, roughly analogous to the early prediction of a severe hurricane season on Earth, involves the number of sunspots on the solar surface, phenomena that have been monitored for more than a century. 
Twisted magnetic fields
Every 11 years or so, the Sun goes through an active period, with lots of sunspots. This is important as solar storms, linked to twisted magnetic fields that can hurl out energetic particles, tend to occur near sunspots. 
The Sun is in a relatively quiet period now, but is expected to get more active soon, scientists say.
But scientists do not agree whether the active period will start within months, late 2006 or early 2007, or years, with the first signs in late 2007 or early 2008.
Whenever it begins, the new forecasting method shows sunspot activity is likely to be 30-50% stronger than the last active period.
The peak of the last cycle was in 2001, the researchers say, but the period of activity can span much of a decade.
The strongest solar cycle in recent memory occurred in the late 1950s, when there were few satellites aloft, no astronauts in orbit and less reliance on electrical power grids than now. 
What would happen on Earth?
If a similarly active period occurred now, the impact would be hard to predict, according to Joseph Kunches of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Space Environment Center in Colorado. 
"It's pretty uncertain what would happen, which makes this work more relevant," Kunches says. 
"What we have here is a prediction that the cycle is going to be very active, and what we need and what we're of course working on is to be able to predict individual storms with a couple days or hours in advance so the grids can take the action," Behnke says.

Feeling ticklish?
Most humans cannot tickle themselves because they anticipate their own actions, which alters their sense of perception, according to a new study.
Since it is now believed that a breakdown in this anticipation process may underlie the delusions in schizophrenia, the finding may also lead to a better understanding of this mental disorder.
"It's well known that you can't tickle yourself," says Associate Professor Randy Flanagan, one of the authors of the study published in the latest issue of the journal PLoS Biology.
"One explanation is that since all the sensations are completely predictable, we do 'sensory attenuation', which reduces our touch perception," says Flanagan, a Canadian psychologist at Queen's University in Ontario.
"If we try to deal with all the sensory information directed at us at any given time, it's overwhelming. We can't focus attention on crucial changes in our environment that aren't a function of our own motions." 
Scientists previously speculated that we either filter out unnecessary information after the motion or sensation occurs, or that we predict our own actions.
This would allow us to mostly ignore unnecessary sensations, such as the feel of our vocal chords while we speak, or the constant tapping of our fingers while typing at a keyboard. 
Tap, tap
To determine which of the two mechanisms is at work, the researchers asked 20 right-handed people to tap with one index finger on a force sensor that was sandwiched between the tapping finger and the other hand's passive index finger.
With each finger tap, the sensor would deliver a tapping sensation to the passive finger. 
Similar to self-tickling, the test subjects reported that the tap received by the passive finger was weak because they had anticipated the sensation.
This occurred even when part of the force sensor was removed during surprise trials where the active finger just wound up tapping the air, while the passive finger still received the expected tap. 
"We are constantly predicting the consequences of our actions," Flanagan says. "When we act on ourselves and on the world around us we predict in real time as we move."
Hearing voices
Flanagan also explains that a breakdown in this prediction process could be why people with delusional schizophrenia "hear voices" and mumble to themselves. 
"If a healthy person murmurs to himself, he knows that he is hearing his own voice," Flanagan says.
"Now imagine that the person has a deficit in the predictive mechanism. He murmurs and then suddenly hears murmuring but cannot label it as himself. As he tries to make sense of the alien voice, the explanation for it could be quite bizarre, such as thinking it is coming from a wall or the pavement." 
He is not certain whether some people with schizophrenia can tickle themselves, but since their falsely alien sensations are often accompanied by feelings of fear and paranoia, it is likely that the experience would not be pleasurable. 
Impressed
Chris Frith, a professor of neuropsychology and deputy director of the Leopold M&uuml;ller Functional Imaging Laboratory at University College London, says he is "very impressed" by the new study. 
Both Frith and Flanagan hope that the findings will help people with schizophrenia, which the US National Institute of Mental Health says affects around 51 million people worldwide. 
"[We need] robust techniques for measuring the magnitude of the [prediction] breakdown. If techniques like the one described in the PLoS Biology paper can be used with patients, then this will have a major impact on diagnosis and the monitoring of the effects of treatment," Frith says.

Footprints from people running away from Mount Vesuvius when it erupted nearly 4000 years ago, possibly part of a mass exodus
Mount Vesuvius, the volcano that buried Pompeii and nearby towns in 79AD, could erupt far more violently, US and Italian volcanologists have discovered.
Based on evidence from a powerful earlier eruption, the scientists say such an event could destroy villages and kill people as far as 25 kilometres from its summit.
Dr Giuseppe Mastrolorenzo of the Vesuvius Observatory in Italy, Professor Michael Sheridan, of the University of Buffalo in New York, and colleagues have found compelling evidence that nearly 4000 years ago, Vesuvius produced a most devastating eruption. 
The event, called the Avellino catastrophe, destroyed the area of present-day Naples, making Bronze Age farmers flee for their lives.
The researchers first examined the well-preserved remains of Nola, a village about 15 kilometres northeast of the volcano.
Digging the ash layer left by the eruption, they found evidence for "a sudden, en masse evacuation". 
"Scenes of everyday life, frozen by the volcanic deposits, testify that people suddenly left the village: the moulds of four huts, with pottery and other objects left inside; skeletons of a dog and nine pregnant goat victims found in a cage; and footprints of adults, children, and cows filled by the first fallout pumice," the researchers write in the current issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
One kilometre east of Nola, Mastrolorenzo's team found skeletons of a man and a woman buried under a metre of volcanic debris, a dramatic evidence of "their unlucky escape attempt and their death due to suffocation". 
The eruption was probably preceded by a warning blast. A 36 kilometre column of ash and gas would have spewed high up into the atmosphere and then rained down, covering about 20 kilometres.
The scientists believe that most of the 10,000 or so inhabitants of the area probably survived the eruption. Indeed, they found thousands of footprints made in the ash, all leading away from the volcano. 
Archaeological evidence indicates that some people returned and tried to set up settlements again. 
It was a vain attempt, as the deposit of millions of cubic metres of ash and small pumice fragments made the area uninhabitable for hundreds of years. 
"We have got to know Vesuvius much better. Now we know that Pompeii doesn't represent the worst-case scenario anymore," says Mastrolorenzo.
"We need to incorporate the data of this prehistoric eruption into the hazard plan. This is the most extreme scenario that could impact the city of Naples and its surroundings." 
An eruption similar to the Avellino catastrophe today would affect an area much larger than the actual danger 'red zone', which comprises a population of about 600,000 and 18 towns squashed within about a 6 kilometre radius between the volcano and the sea.
Indeed, at least 3 million people live within the area destroyed by the Avellino eruption.
"[Computer modelling shows that] within a radius of at least 12 kilometres from the volcano, the impact force and sedimentation rate of the pyroclastic surge would cause total devastation and mortality, because the inferred dynamic overpressure of surge clouds would exceed even the building strength," say the researchers. 
Some 15 kilometres away from the volcano most people would survive, though there would still be risk of suffocating from the fine dust cloud. 
"Because a volcanic crisis can start quickly, leaving only a few weeks to months for planning, it is important to use all available data to forecast the scale of potential events," Mastrolorenzo says.
"Catastrophes are often caused by the most extreme events." 
A cycle of eruptions
Vesuvius is the only active volcano on the European mainland and erupts dramatically in cycles.
According to Sheridan, while there may not be a high probability that events like the Avellino eruption or the Pompeii eruption will occur in the near future, Italian authorities must still consider those possibilities.
"There was this Bronze Age eruption about 4000 years ago, and then 2000 years ago there was the 79AD event. It seems that just about every 2000 years, there's been a major eruption of this scale at Vesuvius," says Sheridan. 
"Using a standard statistical test, there is more than a 50% chance that a violent eruption will happen at Vesuvius next year. With each year that goes by, the statistical probability increases," he says.

Do you metabolise caffeine quickly or slowly? The answer could tell you about your risk of having a heart attack
A gene that controls how fast your body breaks down caffeine might explain why some people can get away with drinking lots of coffee and others can't, new research suggests.
People with a genetic variation linked with slow caffeine metabolism are more likely to have a nonfatal heart attack, the researchers write today in the Journal of the American Medical Association. 
The researchers looked at 4024 people who lived in coffee-rich Costa Rica between 1994 and 2004. Half had had a nonfatal heart attack, and half had not. 
They found that slightly more than half had the slow version of the gene while the others had the fast form.
"We found in individuals who had the slow version of this gene, as little as two cups of coffee a day is associated with an increased risk of heart disease," says study author Dr Ahmed El-Sohemy of the University of Toronto. 
For those with the slow-acting gene, two to three cups of coffee a day increased their odds of a heart attack by 36%, and four or more cups a day increased the risk by 64%, the study says.
"For those who had the fast version of the gene, there was no increased risk, even with four or more cups a day," he says.
"Surprisingly, what we found was that in individuals under 50 years of age who were fast metabolisers ... consumption of as little as one to three cups a day was associated with a lower risk of heart disease." 
Those with the fast-acting gene who drank two to three cups of coffee a day had 22% reduced odds of having a heart attack, but drinking four or more cups a day lessened the risk by 1%, the study found. 
"Initially we thought that individuals who had the slow version of this gene might drink less caffeine because it stays in their system longer," El-Sohemy says.
"But what we found is that regardless of the version of the gene that the person had, it did not affect how much caffeine they consumed." 
Breaking down caffeine in the liver
The enzyme cytochrome P450 1A2 is responsible for metabolising caffeine in the liver. And variations of the gene for this enzyme can slow down or speed up caffeine metabolism.
"An individual cannot predict whether or not they have the slow or fast version of the gene, because although they can feel the effects of caffeine on the nervous system, they cannot feel the effects on their blood vessels," El-Sohemy says. 
Since tests to determine which form of the gene you carry are not readily available and you cannot feel how fast your body is getting rid of caffeine, the study's authors recommended reining in coffee consumption to no more than four cups a day.
Previous studies have offered conflicting findings about the health effects of coffee, and El-Sohemy notes other chemicals in coffee may play a role. 
 "Of all the studies that have been conducted to date that looked at the effects of either coffee or caffeine on heart disease, none of them have taken into account genetic differences in the ability to break down caffeine," El-Sohemy says.
"We are approaching the era of personalised dietary advice."

Are you looking at me?
More Australian racehorses have vision-threatening eye disease than expected, a new study shows.
About one in 13 thoroughbred horses examined may be in danger of losing their sight.
Cataracts, corneal scarring and lesions are among the serious conditions that two veterinarians report in the latest issue of the journal Veterinary Ophthalmology.
Dr Simon Hurn and colleague Dr Andrew Turner say there is a perception in the racing industry that eye disease in horses is not very common.
But they had noticed a higher than acceptable level of eye disease in performance horses and were concerned.
When they couldn't find data to compare what they had found, they decided to carry out their own research.
They conducted ophthalmic examinations on 204 flat-racing and jump-racing horses at four metropolitan and two country racing stable complexes in Victoria.
They found potential vision-threatening eye disease in 7.4% of the horses and non-vision threatening disease in 57.4%.
Generally horses' eyesight is on par with that of humans, the researchers say.
"They probably don't have the same colour spectral type vision that we have but they do see colour and they do see movement. And because they move at speed, we can also assume they have good visual acuity [sharpness] as well," says Hurn.
He adds that many of the eye findings were 'incidental' and wouldn't affect horses' vision.
"Horses don't have to read newspapers or drive cars. Most of their time is spent eating or watching out for what they think are predators," he says.
"They can do that just fine with that vision that they have and the reason they don't have the same type of colour vision that we have is that they just don't need it. Their eyesight is [good] for their environment."
Hurn says while there may well be a genetic component to the eye diseases in general, he also believes vets are getting better at diagnosing eye disease.
"We noticed a higher than normal incidence of cataracts in the population of horses, [however] and this could certainly have a genetic component," he says.

Existing remote telecommunication networks are struggling to cope with today's internet traffic, according to one expert. So how about a new de-centralised network?
Remote communities could access cheaper wireless broadband services than their city cousins via new-generation mobile phones and computers, say Australian researchers.
The devices could also be part of local community telecommunication networks independent of major centralised networks, the researchers add.
Dr Mehran Abolhasan of the University of Wollongong is heading a team that will trial the new technology in a remote Western Australian community later this year.
"Remote communities still rely on outdated technologies and very low-capacity networks that are not really able to provide today's internet traffic," says Abolhasan, a telecommunications and computer engineering expert.
One of the main reasons for this is the enormous cost of rolling out links to the latest communications hubs in the cities.
And the low population in remote areas means the return on investment is quite low.
So despite government subsidies, in Australia for example, remote communities have to pay more to get access to telecommunications than people in the city and they are often the least likely to be able to afford it.
Ad hoc networks
Abolhasan hopes he has a low-cost alternative to providing up-to-date telecommunications to remote communities.
His team is developing new software and hardware that can run what are called ad hoc networks.
The key components of the networks are small portable computer devices, such as PCs or mobile phones that can transmit as well as receive microwave signals.
Their ability to transmit means that, as well as being a PC or mobile phone, the devices can act as nodes in a communication network.
And if they are put on top of towers they can transmit messages over long distances, especially when a number of them are linked in a chain.
Ad hoc networking is cheap because of the low cost of the technology that enables wireless communication between different units, says Abolhasan, and because much of the open source software is already freely available.
"[Remote] communities would have access to a broadband-type service for a very low price," he says, "cheaper than current broadband services in the city."  
He says ad hoc networks have another advantage because they are not centralised and if devices break down they can communicate with other units and re-route messages.
Extending existing networks
Abolhasan says ad hoc networking can extend the range of existing infrastructure.
For example, if a remote community has a central building with access to a satellite network, it can extend the satellite network to individual homes.
The technology could also be used to enable communications within a community. For example people could run their own broadband television station from the local community centre.
"You can have a community private network without going through any infrastructure," says Abolhasan.
The main research challenge is to increase the capacity of the technology, which at the moment is unable to service large numbers of people at the same time, he says.
The team plans to trial ad hoc networking in an Indigenous community in Western Australia in the second half of this year.
"If it works in outback Australia, it should work just about anywhere," says Abolhasan.
He says ad hoc networks don't need much power and could run on solar power. He expects the technology to be available in the next three to five years.
The project is funded by the Desert Knowledge Co-operative Research Centre in Alice Springs.

Carbon dating is shedding new light on ancient scrolls and what they tell us about the history of Buddhism
Rare manuscripts dubbed the 'Dead Sea Scrolls of Buddhism' are indeed from the 1st and 5th centuries AD, carbon dating shows.
The manuscripts, which were written on fragile birch bark, provide an important insight into the development of Buddhist literature and help fill the gaps in some areas of Buddhist history.
Buddhism was traditionally a spoken tradition and until now, little has been known about how it developed from the spoken to the written word.
While Buddhism flourished throughout Asia, it disappeared from India, Central Asia and the Indonesian archipelago, taking with it many literary traditions.
"When we first learnt about these manuscripts we looked at the scripts and the language and made a rough estimate of their approximate age," says Dr Mark Allon, from the University of Sydney, an Australian researcher who is translating the text.
Carbon dating, conducted by researchers from the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, confirmed the assessment.
The scientists used the process of accelerator mass spectrometry to radiocarbon date the bark on which the manuscipts were written.
This process counts the rare carbon-14 isotopes in a sample and uses this to calculate the sample's approximate age based on the radioactive decay over time.
Two manuscripts from the Senior collection, which is named after the scrolls' British owner, date to between 130 and 250AD 
And three manuscripts from the Sch&oslash;yen text, named after the scrolls' Norwegian owner, date to between the 1st and 5th century AD.
Allon says the Senior collection dating is particularly important because it makes a major contribution to Indian Buddhism chronology.
"One of the manuscripts we studied was found in a pot with an inscription on it indicating that it was donated in the year 12. While it didn't say what era that was, the characteristics of the inscription tell us that it must refer to the Kanishka era."
Kanishka was a very important king in northern India in about the 1st or 2nd century AD, but the dates he lived and ruled have been debated for a century or more. 
"What the carbon dates told us was that the earlier date favoured by some scholars, namely 78AD, is no longer tenable because the carbon dates tell us that the manuscripts actually dated from 130AD to 250AD." 
The manuscripts are believed to have originated from Afghanistan and are among many archaeological artefacts that were sold on the international market in times of war.

Gamma-ray bursts like this are among the few things energetic enough to be seen from such a distance
The discovery of the most distance and ancient stellar explosion has now been confirmed and pushed back another 100 million light-years to 12.8 billion light-years away. 
The explosion, known as GRB 050904, took place when the universe was a relatively youthful 900 million years old. 
The fatal stellar scream, beamed from a giant star as it collapsed to make a black hole, contains direct clues to what the universe was like so long ago. 
A gamma-ray burst, or GRB, is one of the few things in the universe bright enough to be seen so long and far away. 
Three separate international teams of astronomers, including observations from Australia's Mount Stromlo and Siding Spring Observatories, describe the GRB in the journal Nature today. 
Among them is Assistant Professor Daniel Reichart of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
He began to suspect his team was seeing something unusual when the researchers detected the afterglow of the blast in infrared light, but could not see it in visible light, as is normally the case.
The gamma rays were initially detected from the space-borne Swift telescope and burst detector. The rest of the observations were made from earthbound telescopes. 
"At that point we either had found the most distant burst in the universe, or there was dust in the way," Reichart says. 
Could it be dust?
A careful analysis of just which wavelengths of light were missing from GRB 050904 made it clear dust was not the culprit, he explains. 
"Dust scatters blue light out, but it's much more gradual," says Reichart. 
GRB 050904's bluer light drops off very suddenly. That's the signature of the light having been stretched out, essentially making it redder (called redshift), over billions of years of travel through an expanding universe. 
In a way, it's the wavelengths of light that didn't make it across time and space that pegged GRB 050904 as the oldest and furthest star ever seen.
But the light that did survive the journey has a lot to offer as well.
"Its attraction lies in what it can reveal about star formation early in the history of the universe," says astrophysicist Dr Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, who writes about the importance of the discovery in the same issue of Nature.
Because all light, when broken into a spectrum, carries essentially a bar code of the elements that created or influenced it, the light from GRB 050904 could reveal a lot about where and when heavy elements become more common in the early universe. 
"Distant galaxies are themselves difficult to study because they appear faint and small," Ramirez-Ruiz explains.
"GRBs will serve not only as signposts to such galaxies, but could be used to study the gradual build-up of heavy elements in them to determine the conversion history of primordial gas into stars." 
The first generation of stars in the universe was made of hydrogen and helium alone. Heavier elements are made by the most massive stars when they die.
Even at the colossal distance of 12.8 billion light-years, GRB 050904 is not quite old enough to be among the first generation of stars, say astronomers. 
That's because large stars that can create GRBs have relatively short lifespans.
Our Sun, in contrast, is a medium-sized star which, at about 4.5 billion years old, is only middle-aged for its kind.

Snuppy, on the right, with the three-year-old male Afghan hound whose somatic skin cells were used to clone him
Two DNA tests have backed claims by disgraced South Korean scientist Professor Hwang Woo-Suk that he made the world's first cloned dog, Snuppy.
The investigations are published today by the journal Nature, which printed the original research last August, five months before Hwang was exposed as a fraud for his work in stem cells. 
Snuppy, short for Seoul National University puppy, initially stirred admiration among scientists as dogs are among the trickiest of animals to clone.
But this feeling quickly ceded to suspicion when the stem cell scandal broke. 
One of the inquiries was conducted by a panel at the university, where Hwang carried out the work at the College of Veterinary Medicine, Nature says.
The panel had already announced in January that Snuppy is believed to be a genuine clone.
This investigation was then double-checked by genome specialists led by Dr Elaine Ostrander at the US National Institutes of Health, using samples provided  by the Seoul team.
The two investigations entailed making a DNA fingerprint of Snuppy, looking notably for microsatellites, telltale markers on the genome.
They then compared microsatellites between the puppy and his genetic donor, a three-year-old Afghan hound named Tai; the surrogate mother, a yellow Labrador retriever; the unidentified donor of the egg; and other pedigree dogs. 
Perfect match
The tests showed a perfect match between Snuppy and Tai, confirming that Snuppy was created by placing Tai's DNA in the empty donated egg, the scientists say. 
"It is highly unlikely that Snuppy came either from extreme inbreeding or from ... twinning," says the Seoul panel. "It is virtually certain that Snuppy was generated from somatic-cell nuclear transfer, as claimed." 
Somatic-cell nuclear transfer entails taking an egg and removing the nucleus, which is then replaced by the nucleus of an adult cell taken from the animal to be cloned.
The reconstructed egg is then given a jolt of electricity or treated to a chemical cocktail to make it divide, and placed in a bath of nurturing chemicals to continue growing.
The embryo is then placed in the uterus of a surrogate mother, which if all goes well brings it to term. 
This technique was used for the first cloned mammal, Dolly the sheep, in 1997, and has been used on a dozen other species since then. 
Dogs, though, have been a big challenge because it is hard to acquire mature canine eggs. 
In contrast to other mammals, dogs ovulate when their eggs are immature. The eggs then go to a special duct to mature for two or three days. 
