Emus, it turns out, have legs that are close together, like many dinosaurs, and tend to look around a lot as they walk, Breithaupt says.
This scanning behaviour causes emus to often cross the left foot over the right leg and the right foot over the left, making the same confusing pattern seen in the dinosaur tracks.
"Sure enough there are wonderful comparisons," says Breithaupt. "Emus are our biological Rosetta Stone."
He presented the latest on emus as proxies for dinosaurs at the recent Geological Society of America in Philadelphia.
The search for a modern animal to act as a proxy for dinosaur tracks started, says Breithaupt, because he was getting a little impatient with all the speculation about the tracks.
There was too much of what he calls "prehistoric hyperbole".
So after passing on ostriches, which have only two toes, and rheas, which have three-toes but overly rambunctious personalities, emus were the best alternative. Plus there was an emu ranch just across the state line in Colorado.
Breithaupt and his team now think that the Red Gulch dinosaurs were probably human-sized meat eaters, or theropods, travelling along in groups.
The groups may have included families, since there are juvenile and adults tracks together, implying some sort of parental care.
Exactly what the dinosaurs looked like, however, is a mystery because the mid-Jurassic Period is particularly poor in dinosaur fossils in North America.
"There is virtually nothing known about dinosaurs in North America from that time," says geologist Dr Erik Kvale, who discovered the tracks and did a great deal of the first geological work there.
"Chances are there were some very gregarious behaviours of dinosaurs [at Red Gulch], but it's only a snapshot."
What can be said with more certainty is that the dinosaurs were walking in a very different landscape than today, says Kvale.
The sands beneath their feet were carbonate sands like those found in the Bahamas or the Florida Keys, but the climate of the ancient shoreline was probably a lot drier.
"The Persian Gulf is a better analogue," says Kvale.

NASA is discussing whether a shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope is worth the risk
After all the time, money, anguish and work to return the space shuttle fleet to flight, the US space agency still has one lingering question to resolve. Can a shuttle mission be sent to save Hubble?
If not for the 2003 Columbia disaster, the fifth servicing call to the Hubble Space Telescope probably would have happened by now.
That mission would have left the 16-year-old observatory with fresh batteries, replacement gyroscopes for steering and two new science instruments.
Such upgrades could keep Hubble on the cutting edge of astronomical research, delving into questions such as the nature of the mysterious dark energy that seems to be driving the universe's expansion and what the universe looked like as its earliest structures emerged after the Big Bang.
But after the Columbia accident shuttle flights that do not go to the space station, where astronauts can seek shelter in case their ship is too damaged to fly home, were considered too risky and the Hubble house call was cancelled.
NASA looked into a robotic servicing mission instead, but found the cost and complexity of such a mission too daunting.
Meanwhile, public outrage over NASA's decision to let the popular space telescope fester, culminating in a pledge by the new head of NASA to re-consider flying one last flight to Hubble.
Now, with three post-Columbia flights complete, the time has come to decide Hubble's fate.
NASA is considering if the safety upgrades implemented after the accident offset the risk of flying with few options available to save a stranded shuttle crew.
"Hubble is definitely sort of the comeback kid, so hopefully it will be able to do it one more time," says Professor Adam Riess, an astronomer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore.
"I would expect that this is the final meeting," he adds. "Now it's a matter of coming up a with a decision."
Shuttle program workers have certainly done their homework.
The first order of business was to fix problems with debris falling off the ship's fuel tank during launch.
A chunk of insulating foam broke off Columbia's tank during lift-off and smashed a hole in the wing's heat shield.
As the shuttle attempted to return to Earth 16 days later, superheated atmospheric gases blasted into the breach, destroying the shuttle and killing the seven astronaut crew.
NASA's first tank redesign, tested during a July 2005 flight of shuttle Discovery, failed to prevent dangerously large pieces of foam from falling off the tank. A second redesign was tested a year later, and this time the tank was deemed safe enough to resume flights.
The shuttle program also demonstrated how the ship's robot arm and newly added extension boom could be used during flight to scrutinise the shuttle's heat shield for damages.
Astronauts also tested using the boom as a work platform in case repairs were needed to fix heat shield holes before attempting atmospheric re-entry.
Finally, engineers developed rudimental heat shield repair kits and techniques.
But there is no getting around the issue of flying without an orbital safe. Hubble's orbit is too far from the station for a shuttle to get there.
Theoretically, NASA could severely cut shuttle power and keep a crew in orbit for several weeks until another shuttle could be launched on a rescue mission. But there is no guarantee the flight could be launched on time or that another problem might not also strike the rescue ship.
"You just don't have the orbital lifetime on a Hubble mission to be able to get another vehicle launched," says deputy shuttle program manager John Shannon.
"We're going to have to go into the Hubble decision not counting on the launch-on-need vehicle," he says.
"That's the difficult question the agency's going to have. Do we have enough confidence in the [tank] design? Do we have enough confidence in our inspection and repair to be able to do that? I think that's where the discussion is mostly going to lie."
Another issue is whether to risk a shuttle and crew on a Hubble flight when NASA is under a strict deadline to finish the space station before 2010 when the shuttles are to be retired.
The agency needs at least 14 more construction missions and wants two additional flights beyond that to deliver heavy equipment and spare parts to the outpost.
In a recently released flight schedule, agency managers set aside a Hubble servicing mission for April 2008.
Station assembly, which resumed with last month's flight of shuttle Atlantis, would be complete in July 2010 under the new manifest.
Without a servicing mission, astronomers expect Hubble to last only another two or three years before its batteries give out. Even before then, the finicky gyroscopes could break or the cameras could fail.
"It would really be a blow," says astronomer Dr Harry Ferguson, also with the Space Telescope Science Institute. "I think everyone is really quite hopeful that [a repair mission] will happen. We're waiting with bated breath."
If it gets upgrades, Hubble should last until at least 2013. That means it could still be operational when its sharp-eyed infrared replacement, the James Webb Space Telescope, arrives in orbit to begin its five-year mission.
The Webb observatory, which is not designed for servicing by astronauts, is scheduled for launch in June 2013.

Industrial aerosols don't just affect air quality but also the temperature of our oceans
A projected drop in air pollution will affect global ocean currents and could cause a marked rise in water temperature in the southern hemisphere, the author of a new study says.
Dr Wenju Cai and colleagues from CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research are the first to model the impact of changing levels of particulate air pollution, or aerosols, on ocean currents.
They publish their findings in the journal Geophysical Research Letters.
Cai says air pollution like sulfate, organic particles and black carbon produced from fossil fuel burning, transport emissions and power plants, has increased rapidly over the past 50 years.
But tighter regulation and a worldwide move towards cleaner fuels means some projections have aerosols dropping to pre-1960 levels by around 2050, Cai says.
This, however, has a downside. Less air pollution means sunlight can more easily reach Earth, which many researchers say could mean higher temperatures.
Cai says rises in surface and water temperature could also cause a slowdown in the so-called worldwide conveyor belt, an ocean circulation system that transports heat from southern hemisphere oceans to those in the north.
So cleaner air will result in colder northern hemisphere temperatures and warmer waters in the south, Cai says.
"That will have a big impact in Europe and the northern hemisphere because the conveyor belt is sending heat to that part of the globe," he says.
"In the southern hemisphere ... we will get warmer faster and the rise in sea levels will accelerate."
Cai says warming will be most rapid in the Tasman Sea, which could heat up by 4&#176;C by 2100, with major implications for marine life and ecosystems.
How do aerosols influence ocean currents?
Aerosols keep the Earth cool by reflecting away solar radiation, says Cai's co-author and CSIRO colleague Dr John Church. So, they are thought to mask some of the effects of global warming.
But because industrial development has produced a higher concentration of aerosols in the northern hemisphere than the south, in the past the cooling effect has been more marked in the north.
Cooler northern hemisphere temperatures should mean cooler northern oceans, and cooler waters should equate with lower sea levels.
This wasn't the case, says Church. Instead, the study found evidence that the cooling waters had intensified movement of the conveyer belt, speeding up delivery of heat from south to north.
Reversal
The situation may reverse once aerosol levels fall, Cai says, effectively causing a slow-down in the transport of heat from the southern hemisphere to the north.
Cai says an exaggerated version of this scenario was the basis for the Hollywood movie The Day After Tomorrow, in which a change in ocean currents produces a new ice age.
Church says it's unclear exactly how dropping aerosol levels will affect global temperatures when combined with rising temperatures associated with the greenhouse effect.
"We don't understand the aerosol forcing as well as greenhouse, so there's a question of how much of the global warming is compensated by aerosols," he says.
"If it's a small amount, as we reduce the aerosols in the atmosphere there won't be a rapid acceleration of climate change, but if they're actually masking a very large amount then as we reduce the aerosols that has big implications."

Australia is developing the world's first koala sperm bank
Zoos around the world will soon be able to breed their own koalas without having to fly in breeding stock from Australia, researchers say.
They say new technology to preserve sperm will allow koala sperm to be exported from Australia for the first time.
University of Queensland reproductive biologist and team leader Dr Steve Johnston says the researchers have been able to extend the shelf life of the sperm to 40 hours.
They've done this by diluting the semen in a special pH balanced solution containing nutrients and antibiotics, and keeping it chilled.
The team this week unveiled eight koala joeys born from artificial insemination with the diluted semen.
Being able to dilute the semen is the first step in being able to provide frozen specimens internationally and interstate, Johnston says.
This is because fresh koala semen only lasts a couple of hours and the fragility of the cells means they don't easily survive freezing and thawing.
The team now plans to set up the world's first koala sperm bank.
What do koalas and camels have in common?
Johnston says koalas, like camels, have a special factor in their sperm which triggers ovulation in the female. 
"What we found was ... there's a combination between the mating itself and the factor in the semen which causes the [brain] to release luteinising hormone, which results in the ovulation process," he says.
Diluting the semen without affecting the ovulation factor was a major challenge for researchers, he says.
"Diluting is a first step because if you're going to freeze something you have to put it into a diluent which allows you to put cryoprotectants in the fluid to protect the sperm against freezing," he says.
"The other thing is when you dilute the sperm you don't have to use as much, you don't waste as much sperm when inseminating."
Low sperm count
Koalas have a relatively low sperm count with only about 100 million sperm per ejaculation, compared with echidnas, which have 10 times that amount.
Johnston says being able to send a frozen sperm sample internationally will make it easier to introduce genetic diversity to koala populations.
And setting up a sperm bank will help conservation efforts in Australia and enable samples to be screened for common koala diseases like chlamydia and retroviruses.
But don't hold your breath about buying your very own koala sperm online, Johnston says.
"The Queensland government is making sure that none of that will happen."

Mathematicians say you can have your cake and eat it too, if you're prepared to do the sums
Mathematicians have devised a fairer way to share a cake, according to new research.
It allows you to choose a slice with more chocolate icing. But the trade-off is that you get a smaller piece.
The research, which is based on the principle of surplus procedure, is published in the Notices of the American Mathematical Society.
The traditional way of dividing a cake is the 'cut and choose' approach, where one person cuts the cake in two and the other chooses a half, write Professor Michael Jones and colleagues from Montclair State University in New Jersey.
While this ensures both people get the same sized portion, it doesn't necessarily mean they are equally happy.
For example, one may like chocolate icing, sprinkles or cream more than the other.
Surplus procedure
To even this out, the researchers propose people tell a referee how much they value certain qualities of a cake.
The referee then uses these weighted values to calculate where to cut the cake.
In an ideal world, both parties would get 100% of what they want. But in reality there's a compromise.
Jones says his team's algorithms ensure that both parties get about 65% of what they want, based on the principle of giving each person at least 50% of the cake plus the surplus as they value it.
The catch is that the system depends on honesty and requires a referee and a calculator.
The surplus procedure system can be used for two or three people, Jones says, but doesn't work quite as well for three or more.
He says the method can also be applied to other heterogeneous and divisible items, like dividing land or deciding how much rent each flatmate pays.
The wedge system
Dr Burkard Polster, an Australian mathematician from Monash University, isn't convinced the proposed method is best.
"How do you associate a number with something like happiness?" he says.
"If you really wanted to sell this to a 10 year old, they wouldn't go for it, They'd still think the other piece is better."
He says a square cake, for example, can be cut into five fairly by using the equation that says the area of a triangle equals the length of its base times its height, divided by two.
The cake can't be cut into equal squares because there will only be four pieces. And it can't be cut into parallel pieces because the pieces on the edge will have more icing (if the cake is iced around the edge and not just on top).
The answer is to cut the cake in equally sized wedges.
"If the cake has a perimeter of 50 centimetres, you start at one corner and measure 10 centimetres and make a mark, then you go around until you're back to the beginning and you have five marks.
"From those marks you cut through the middle and those wedges will be exactly one fifth."
Eggs and sandwiches
Polster says applying surplus procedure to cakes isn't the first time maths has been used to share food.
The 'egg yolk' theory describes how best to divide a fried egg into pieces with an equal portion of yolk and white.
And he says the 'ham sandwich' theory makes sure you can cut a sandwich and get equal amounts of ham, lettuce and bread.

A vending machine containing a new type of printer could churn out a novel in an instant
An innovative printer head may lead to affordable printers that spew out a thousand pages per minute, its developers say.
Such printers could lead to fast, high-quality photo printing as well as on-demand printed media, say the researchers.
Imagine customised newspapers and magazine and instant books printed by a vending machine.
"Think of such a machine in an airport terminal. You slide your credit card, chose a [book] for your flight, and get it warm from the printer in less than a minute," says Dr Moshe Einat, senior lecturer at the College of Judea and Samaria in Ariel, Israel, and team member.
The JeTrix printer head, invented by colleague Nissim Einat and team, could be on the market in two years in printers costing U$500-U$1000, the researchers say.
The machine could reduce backups at the office printer too.
Today, even the best printers used for business purposes cost thousands of dollars and max out at about 50 pages per minute.
The speed is limited, in part, by the printer head. For starters, it's usually much smaller than the page and takes time to scan back and forth while applying the ink.
Nozzle redesign
The other challenge has to do with the nozzles.
The ink is typically pooled in a main reservoir and distributed through a chamber, or manifold, that has many branching tubes, each leading to a nozzle.
To get uniform drops, the pressure of the ink in this system must be precisely regulated and maintained, a delicate task that becomes more difficult as the number of nozzles and the size of the nozzle array increases.
Overcoming obstacles
The JeTrix overcomes conventional limitations in two ways. First, it does not have a main reservoir or manifold that requires delicate pressure maintenance. Second, it is not limited by size. In fact, it can be as large as piece of paper and theoretically has a nozzle for every pixel.
The difference has to do with the way Einat and his team built the printer head. They turned to the same technology used to manufacture computer chips, etching the printer head out of silicon wafer chips.
Instead of a small array of nozzles that makes many scans to print a page, the design is a flat, 2D panel designed to be as big as the page and eject all of the necessary ink simultaneously.
Although the approach has a number of innovative features, it also has limitations says Dr Ross Allen, an internationally recognised technologist based in St Helena, California, who has 40 patents in imaging and printing technology.
"Inkjet print heads typically make two to eight passes over the same pixel row in order to hide any defects caused by nozzles that don't operate or meet drop ejection specifications," says Allen.
"If Einat's print head lays down all of the ink at once, the printed page could show artefacts or flaws from 'bad' nozzles."
Printing in colour
Printing in colour could also present a challenge.
"You'll need black, cyan, magenta and yellow page-size print heads printing in precise registration," says Allen.
Finally, he says, no matter how fast a printer head applies ink, it doesn't get around the basic limitation that the ink must dry before the page is stacked in the paper tray.

Who's that? Oh, it's me
When presented with a jumbo-sized mirror, elephants recognise their reflections and investigate the inside of their mouths and ears, according to a new study.
Such self-awareness is rare. Until the paper, published online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, scientists believed only humans, apes and dolphins possessed self-recognition skills.
All these animals are highly intelligent and seem to feel empathy, a quality that is probably linked to self-awareness.
"What they have in common is complex sociality that includes high levels of cooperation, altruism and large brains," says co-author Dr Frans de Waal, a psychology professor at Emory University in Atlanta.
"In literature about human children, there is speculation as to how increased self-awareness makes it possible to set the self apart from others, which in turn permits the self to take the other's perspective, a prerequisite for complex forms of empathy," says de Waal, director of the Living Links Center at the university's Yerkes National Primate Research Center.
For the study, de Waal and colleagues Dr Diana Reiss and Joshua Plotnik introduced three adult female Asian elephants - Happy, Patty and Maxine - to a large mirror placed in their exhibit at the Bronx Zoo in New York City.
According to the paper, animals typically have a social response towards the reflection they see in the mirror. They then try to inspect the mirror, such as by looking behind it. Most animals, such as parrots, dogs and cats, show these behaviours.
But the three elephants had different reactions to their reflections. Each elephant played a sort of peek-a-boo by swaying their heads, trunks and bodies in and out of mirror view. They even brought food in front of the mirror and watched themselves eat.
Maxine took her trunk and stuck it in her mouth, as though she were investigating the inside of her oral cavity. She also used her trunk to pull her ear slowly forward towards the mirror.
X marks the spot
The researchers next painted two X marks on the foreheads of the elephants. One mark was invisible to control for odour and tactile cues, the other fully visible.
This 'mark test' is the scientific standard for determining whether an animal recognises itself in a mirror.
As soon as Happy saw the visible mark, she touched it with her trunk in front of the mirror. She did this 47 times. Maxine and Patty, however, ignored the marks on their foreheads.
"We believe that because elephants love to dust-bathe and throw food and dirt on their backs for storage, such a relatively small mark on their head might not bother them," says Plotnik.
"Chimpanzees and humans groom themselves by picking things off their bodies, while elephants love to be covered in dirt and mud."
Hardly surprising
Dr Lori Marino, a senior lecturer in neuroscience and behavioural biology at Emory, worked on the earlier dolphin-mirror study. 
She is not surprised that elephants can recognise themselves in the mirror.
"Like dolphins, great apes and humans, elephant brains are large and highly convoluted and their social lives are extraordinarily complex," Marino says.
She adds that many other animals possess self-awareness, a multi-faceted, complex phenomenon, which seems to manifest itself at different levels.
Since elephant self-awareness and empathy are on a similar level to that of humans, Plotnik hopes the findings will strengthen our commitment towards conservation, especially as the wild elephant population continues to plummet due to habitat loss and poaching.

A shuttle mission in 2008 will be the Hubble Space Telescope's final service call
The US space agency says it will launch a final space shuttle mission to keep the ageing Hubble Space Telescope in orbit and operational. 
The decision, announced this week by NASA chief Dr Michael Griffin, follows a review of safety concerns and appeals from the scientific community to extend Hubble's life. 
Without a repair mission, which will probably be carried out in 2008, the telescope would shut down in 2009 or even earlier. 
Since it was launched into orbit 16 years ago, the telescope has helped astrophysicists peer deep into the universe, free of the distortions from the Earth's atmosphere.
Orbiting 575 kilometres above the Earth, the Hubble has enabled scientists to better measure the age and origins of the universe, observe distant supernovas, and identify and study bodies in and outside the solar system. 
In 2004, it conveyed pictures of the most distant parts of the universe ever observed by visible light, "the deepest portrait of the visible universe ever achieved by humankind", says the Space Telescope Science Institute. 
NASA had scheduled a mission for Hubble in 2003, but scrapped it after the Columbia shuttle disintegrated while returning to Earth. 
The accident raised serious safety questions for NASA, particularly with the shuttle's heat shield.
This week's announcement comes after two of the last three shuttle missions were judged a success.
Safety review
Griffin says the decision to go ahead was taken after a painstaking review of safety issues.
"We're not going to risk a crew in order to do a Hubble mission," he told staff at the Goddard Space Center.
NASA has said previously it was ready to refurbish the telescope as long as the mission did not put the space shuttle crew in jeopardy. 
The Hubble mission presents a challenge because the shuttle crew would not be able to seek refuge aboard the orbiting International Space Station if a serious problem arose.
NASA also is faced with a busy schedule of another 15 missions to finish building the space station before retiring the entire shuttle program in 2010, or four missions a year. 
A Hubble mission would probably be set for early 2008 and would require a second shuttle to be ready for any rescue mission should the crew face an emergency. 
A new mission to the Hubble would replace the telescope's six stabilising gyroscopes and its batteries to extend its life. 
Astronauts would also repair an infrared spectrometer that has been broken since 2004.
They would also install two new instruments, including the Wide Field Camera 3 that would enhance images of dark matter and of the first galaxies that were formed after the Big Bang.

Putting babies to sleep on their backs allows them to respond to their arousal reflexes
An abnormality in part of the brain that controls breathing, arousal and other reflexes may be what causes sudden infant death syndrome, a finding that could lead to a preventive treatment, a study says.
The discovery could explain why babies lying face down are more likely to die of SIDS.
In that position an infant's reflexes, including head turning and arousal, are harder to trigger when breathing is challenged, says the report from Children's Hospital Boston and Harvard Medical School.
The study, published in this week's Journal of the American Medical Association,  was based on autopsy data from 31 infants who had died from SIDS and 10 who had died from other causes between 1997 and 2005 in California.
In the SIDS infants, a look at the lowest part of the brainstem, the medulla oblongata, found abnormalities in nerve cells that make and use serotonin, one of the chemicals in the brain that transmit messages between nerve cells. 
Serotonin and how it is processed in the brainstem may help coordinate breathing, blood pressure, sensitivity to carbon dioxide and temperature, the report says.
When babies sleep face down or have their faces covered by bedding, they are thought to breathe exhaled carbon dioxide back in, depriving them of oxygen.
When that happens the carbon dioxide increase would normally trigger nerve cells in the brainstem, which in turn stimulate respiratory and arousal centres in the brain. 
"A normal baby will wake up, turn over, and start breathing faster when carbon dioxide levels rise," says Dr Hannah Kinney of the Boston hospital, an author of the paper. 
But babies with the defect die because the reflexes are impaired, she says. 
Public health campaigns aimed at reducing the risk of SIDS have advised parents to put infants to sleep on their back, and to avoid soft bedding, sharing a bed with an infant, smoking during pregnancy and smoking around a baby after birth.
Among the SIDS infants in the new study, 65% were sleeping prone or on their side at the time of death, indicating a need for continued public information on the problem, the study says. 
The findings may spur development of a diagnostic test to identify infants at risk, or perhaps some day a drug or other type of treatment to protect infants with abnormal brainstem serotonin systems, the authors say. 
"This finding lends credence to the view that SIDS risk may greatly increase when an underlying predisposition combines with an environmental risk, such as sleeping face down, at a developmentally sensitive time in early life," says Dr Duane Alexander, director of the US National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, which helped to pay for the study.

'Serious games' are being developed to teach the US military how to defuse tense situations in Iraq
Gamers are increasingly dropping virtual swords and guns, and picking up serious subjects such as cancer or the Iraq war, injecting a dose of reality into the multi-billion dollar sector.
A two-day Serious Games Summit near Washington saw some 500 game designers, publishers, academic experts as well as representatives from the defence and health sectors share information about new 'serious games' on the market that deal with real-world issues. 
"Serious games are games used for some other serious pursuit than entertainment," says Ben Sawyer, co-director of the Serious Games Initiative, which held its first summit two years ago.
Among games featured at the summit were The Redistricting Game, which teaches administrators how legislative redistricting works; HumanSim, which tests medical diagnostic skills; and Tactical Iraqi, a program to train US soldiers with linguistic and cultural skills needed for missions in Iraq. 
That game, largely funded by the US Department of Defense, encourages soldiers who face various scenarios with virtual Iraqis to use diplomacy to avoid or defuse tense situations. Players are also familiarised with basic Iraqi culture.
In one episode, for example, two soldiers seeking information from local Iraqis sitting in a cafe are shown how to introduce themselves to make clear they are not a threat and are told to take off their sunglasses as eye contact is important in Iraqi culture. 
"Clearly, in hindsight, a lot of this training should have been done earlier, but the military recognises it now, and is serious about it now, and I see this as being a permanent change in the military," say Lewis Johnson, chief executive officer of Tactical Language and Culture, a California-based company that developed the game.
"At this point the US military is really taking the lead in emphasising the importance of understanding other cultures, other languages, the importance of communication," he adds.
Johnson says a number of countries have expressed interest in his company's products, which include Tactical Pashto and Tactical French for soldiers or civilian contractors working in Afghanistan or in French-speaking African countries. 
He says the company is also seeking to develop games for the general public and to be used in schools.
Johnson, Sawyer and others attending the summit say they believe the serious games sector will gain popularity in coming years as more funding becomes available and as the Super Mario generation comes of age. 
"Serious games has got very far to go, but in a good way that is nowhere but up," Sawyer says.
"As we start to unlock where we can use games and where they can be successful, and as commercial gaming hurdles forward and we can gain by trailblazing technology they churn out, the things we will be able to do two to three years from now will be more amazing." 
Sawyer says he expects the next big success story to be a serious game being developed to enable students to design their own game on a certain topic.
"Instead of writing a term paper, you might design a game about running a state park, owning a hotel or running an office," he says.

The traffic lights don't need a master controller to 'tell' them when to change
A network of traffic lights that decides to turn green when lots of cars are waiting can help reduce traffic jams, say researchers.
Unlike other traffic light systems that are coordinated centrally, these lights would optimise traffic flow by acting autonomously.
Seung-Bae Cools of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel in Belgium and colleagues report their findings in a paper posted on the arXiv  preprint website.
Traffic management aims to optimise traffic flow, reduce traffic jams and cut the time drivers spend waiting at traffic lights.
Green lights are synchronised into 'green waves' to allow cars to flow through the main avenues of cities without facing a red light.
The idea is to make the speed of the green wave match the desired cruise speed for the street.
But if the green waves remain the same whatever the traffic condition, this can lead to traffic problems.
When traffic is heavy, cars entering a green wave will stop as there are cars ahead of them. And once a car misses the green wave it has to wait the whole duration of the red light to enter the next green wave. 
Self-organising traffic lights
Most advanced traffic control management systems rely on a central computer to help optimise the flow of traffic.
But the Belgian researchers have developed a system that relies on "self-organising traffic lights".
They say the system relies purely on "local interactions between cars and traffic lights" to generate "flexible green waves on demand".
At each traffic light, there is a counter that is set to zero each time a light turns red and then counts the number of cars that build up at the lights.
"If there are more cars approaching or waiting behind a red light, this will turn into green faster than if there are only few cars," say the researchers.
The researchers say the system can greatly improve traffic flow and they have tested this by feeding real traffic data from a Brussels avenue into a traffic simulator.
Adapting to traffic conditions
But Brent Stafford of Intelligent Transport Systems Australia is not convinced the system does better than the latest 'adaptive' traffic light systems.
As the name suggests, adaptive systems adjust to current traffic conditions, rather than say trigger green lights set on a timer.
One existing adaptive system, developed in Australia in the 1970s, is the Sydney Co-ordinated Adaptive Traffic System (SCATS) that now controls about 60,000 intersections in 40 countries around the world, says Stafford.
He says the Belgian researchers compared their system to a less sophisticated system to this and he is not sure how realistic the traffic simulator they used was since it is non-standard.
Panacea for traffic jams?
And other experts warn against thinking such technology can be a panacea for traffic jams.
"At the end of the day you will not be able to resolve traffic jams using just this particular concept," says traffic control engineer Professor Ljubo Vlacic of Australia's Griffith University.
The Belgian researchers agree, saying efficient traffic control should not be an excuse to keep increasing the number of cars on our roads.
They stress alternatives to private cars such as cycling, walking, car sharing and public transport play an essential role.

The red wine molecule seems to mimic the benefits of eating less without the effort of dieting. But will it work in humans?
A compound in red wine and grapes can extend the life span of obese mice and help them enjoy a healthier old age, scientists say. 
The molecule known as resveratrol not only enabled the mice to live longer than other overweight rodents, it also reduced the negative health effects of eating a high-calorie diet. 
Resveratrol has been shown to have same effect in studies on yeast, flies and worms. But the scientists say their research is the first to show it works in mammals.
"It is possible to find a molecule that activates the body's natural defences against ageing. You can use it to enhance the health of a mouse or mammal. That is unprecedented," says Associate Professor David Sinclair, of Harvard Medical School. 
He adds that the study, reported online today in the journal Nature, is proof of the principle that it works in mammals.
But the real test will be to develop formulations or find other molecules to treat age-related illnesses such as diabetes, Alzheimer's, heart disease and cancer in humans.
Researchers already know that restricting calories can prolong life in mice and other organisms.
Resveratrol seems to mimic the beneficial effects of eating less without the hassle of dieting. 
Middle-aged mice
Sinclair and an international team of scientists, including Australian researchers from the University of Sydney, analysed the impact of the molecule by studying three groups of middle-aged mice.
One group ate a standard diet, the second a high-calorie diet and the third had the same diet but were given supplements of resveratrol. 
Eight weeks after starting the study, the scientists noticed a difference between the two high-calorie groups.
By the time the mice were 114 weeks old, 58% in the high-calorie group had died, compared to 42% in the other groups. 
"After six months, resveratrol essentially prevented most of the negative effects of the high-calorie diet in mice," says Dr Rafael de Cabo, a co-author of the study from the US National Institute on Aging.
The study is continuing but so far the compound has extended the life span in the high-calorie mice by about 10-20%. 
"There is no question that we are seeing increased longevity," says Sinclair. 
In addition to increasing survival, the compound reduced the negative effects of being obese so the mice treated with resveratrol lived as long as the lean mice. 
They had healthier heart and liver tissue, decreased blood sugar levels, better insulin sensitivity and were more active than the other rodents. 
Which genes are involved?
When the scientists looked at the genetic level, to see which genes in the mice were switched on or off, they found the molecule had changed the gene expression pattern of the obese mice towards that of lean mice. 
The next step is to understand how the compound works. 
Sinclair and his colleagues believe a key component could be the SIRT1 gene, which is thought to be linked to life span extension. 
Sirtris Pharmaceuticals, a therapeutics company co-founded by Sinclair, has started a trial of a proprietary formulation of resveratrol in patients with type 2 diabetes.
"The real bang will be if somebody proves this is going to work in people," Sinclair adds.

Pigs are the most important domestic animal of the Pacific
Sacred pigs from Vanuatu are shedding new light on how domestic pigs spread throughout the world, say US and Australian researchers.
Dr Koji Lum, from Binghamton University in New York State, and colleagues publish their study on Pacific island pigs in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Pigs are the most important domestic animal in Pacific cultures, being an important source of food and a basis for societal wealth.
They are also sacred animals that some cultures believe have souls.
Yet the origin of Pacific pig breeds has long been unresolved.
Lum and team studied mitochondrial DNA, or mtDNA, from two kinds of sacred pigs from the island nation of Vanuatu.
One was a male of the Narave type. These intersex pigs don't produce enough steroid for complete masculinsation, say the researchers. So they cannot reproduce amongst themselves.
The breed is therefore carried forward by female carriers of the Navare traits.
The second type of sacred pig was the hairless Kapia.
Lum and team, which includes Kirk Huffman from the Australian Museum, compared mtDNA of the pigs from Vanuatu to mtDNA from pigs from Burma, Vietnam, China and the Ryukyu Islands.
They found that the Narave pig DNA matched the DNA of those breeds domesticated in southeast Asia over 3000 years ago.
"[This data suggests the Navare] pigs were recently domesticated within southeast Asia and dispersed during the human colonisation of remote Oceania associated with the Lapita cultural complex," write the researchers.
Interestingly, the researchers found that the other native Pacific pig they studied, Kapia, shared much of its DNA with introduced European breeds.
Two thirds of the DNA from the Kapia pig samples came from Berkshire and Large Black breeds introduced by Europeans.
The researchers say these breeds would have been chosen for crossing with native breeds because they had the same dark coat as the natives, ensuring the offspring remained protected from the tropical sun.
'Nice, but only half the story'
A previous study comparing pig skulls, by Professor Colin Groves of the Australian National University, also concluded southeast Asia was the most likely origin of Pacific pigs.
"[The Lum study is] a nice little confirmation of what we already suspected," says Groves.
But he says using mtDNA, which comes through the maternal line, means the researchers are only finding out the origin of the female pigs.
"They're only getting half the story here," he says.
Groves says if they tested the DNA from the Y chromosome of the Kapia, for example, they may find the main source of the recently introduced pig DNA was via the use of introduced boars rather than sows.
Groves says that while most of the domestic pigs that are widespread in the world today come from Europe, they are actually ultimately of either Chinese origin or half Chinese and half European.
He says European farmers bred their pigs with the fatter Chinese breeds to get a better domestic animal.

In less than 50 years, fish markets like this one in India may not have any produce to sell
The world's fish and seafood populations will collapse by 2048 if current trends in habitat destruction and overfishing continue, resulting in less food for humans, researchers say. 
When they analysed scientific data going back to the 1960s and historical records over a thousand years, they found that marine biodiversity - the variety of ocean fish, shellfish, birds, plants and micro-organisms - had declined dramatically. Some 29% of species were already in collapse. 
Extending this pattern into the future, the scientists calculate that by 2048 all species would be in collapse, which the researchers defined as having catches decline 90% from the maximum catch. 
This applies to all species, from mussels and clams to tuna and swordfish, says Assistant Professor Boris Worm, lead author of the study, which is published today in the journal Science. 
Ocean mammals, including seals, killer whales and dolphins, are also affected. 
"Whether we looked at tide pools or studies over the entire world's ocean, we saw the same picture emerging," says Worm, from Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
"In losing species we lose the productivity and stability of entire ecosystems. I was shocked and disturbed by how consistent these trends are, beyond anything we suspected."
When ocean species collapse, it makes the ocean itself weaker and less able to recover from shocks like global climate change, Worm says. 
The decline in marine biodiversity is largely due to overfishing and destruction of habitat, says Worm.
Over-exploitation
The loss of biodiversity makes ocean ecosystems less able to recover from the effects of global climate change, pollution and over-exploitation, Worm says. 
He likens a diverse ocean environment to a diversified investment portfolio. 
With lots of different species in the oceans, just as with lots of different kinds of investments, "you spread the risk around", Worm says. 
"In the ocean ecosystem, we're losing a lot of the species in our stock portfolio, and by that we're losing productivity and stability. By losing stability, we're losing the ability of the system to self-repair."
To help depleted areas rebuild, marine-life reserves and no-fishing zones need to be set up, the authors say. 
With marine reserves in place, fishing near the reserves can improve as much as four-fold, Worm says. 
Beyond the economic benefits to coastal communities where fishing is a critical industry, there are environmental benefits to rebuilding marine biodiversity, the scientists say. 
Depleted coastal ecosystems are vulnerable to invasive species, disease outbreaks, coastal flooding and noxious algae blooms, they report. 
Certain kinds of aquaculture, like the traditional Chinese cultivation of carp using vegetable waste, can also be beneficial, according to the scientists.
But farms that aim to raise carnivorous fish are less effective.

Mercury will cross the face of the Sun early Thursday morning Australian time, just like it did when this image was taken in 2003
Australians are in a prime position to see Mercury moving across the Sun this week, an event they won't be able to see again for another 26 years.
The transit, which can be seen using amateur telescopes on Thursday morning Australian time, is of particular interest to historians.
Astronomer Dr Nick Lomb of Sydney Observatory says the transit of Mercury in 1677 was the original astronomical event that triggered European colonisation of Australia, and not the transit of Venus, as commonly thought.
"There is a very direct link between the transit of Mercury and the fact that we are here and speak English in Australia," says Lomb.
On 7 November 1677 Edmond Halley witnessed a transit of Mercury from the south Atlantic island of St Helena. 
Lomb says this led him to suggest the idea that planetary transits could be used to work out the scale of the solar system, in particular how far the Earth was from the Sun.
And this eventually led to James Cook's voyage to Tahiti to observe the transit of Venus in 1769, which in turn resulted in the British colonisation of Australia.
Today, scientists use the transit of Mercury and Venus to study the chemical composition of the planets' atmospheres.
As a planet passes in front of the Sun, scientists can use spectroscopy to deduce information about its atmosphere by comparing the difference in the electromagnetic spectrum given off by the Sun and the planet.
Transits can also be used the study the momentary dimming of stars as a planet passes in front of it, a phenomenon used to detect planets circulating stars other than the Sun.
Mercury transits the Sun on average 13 times a century, says Lomb, more frequently than Venus, which only transits twice a century. 
Transits of Mercury occur in either May or November (when Mercury is closer to the Sun) and the next one will not occur until 2016. 
The next transit visible from Australia will not be until 2032.

A targeted approach to weeds, rather than spraying the whole field, could reduce costs and be safer for humans and the environment
A solar-powered robot could help farmers pinpoint and destroy weeds, significantly reducing the use of herbicides, its developers say.
The autonomous agricultural robot or AgBot has been designed by engineers at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
It uses cameras and vision recognition software to seek out weeds, cut them down and apply a precise amount of herbicide to the root.
The targeted approach requires fewer chemicals and minimises the risk that they will get into the environment, whether carried by wind or water.
Farmers typically apply herbicide to the entire field, making no distinction between crop and weed.
The herbicide can become airborne or, if it rains, leech into ground water. If inhaled or ingested in large quantities, some herbicides can be harmful to people.
Hong Young Jeon, a PhD candidate in agricultural and biological engineering, and Nathanael Gingrich, a master's student at the university, saw an opportunity to address the problem.
Working under the direction of agricultural engineer Associate Professor Lei Tian, the team built a robot about 1.5 metres long and 70 centimetres wide.
Solar powered
A curved solar panel mounted to the top gathers solar energy to charge a battery.
And the battery powers two small cameras, sensors, a GPS for navigation and an electric motor that drives the robot about 5 kilometres per hour.
The panel also serves as a canopy to protect the machine from the elements and provides shade for the vision system.
The vision system, although still in the beginning stages of development, will be designed to recognise the shape and structure of plants and be able to distinguish between a weed and a corn plant.
When a weed is spotted, a robotic arm attached to the front of the machine cuts the weed and then squirts herbicide onto the root.
The vision system will also allow the machine to recognise when it has arrived at the end of a row and to turn down the next lane.
Currently an operator controls the robot, but eventually it will work autonomously. 
And a wireless connection between the robot and a laptop computer could make it easy for the farmer to operate the machine from the comfort of his house.
"The farmer could control everything from the living room," says Jeon.
Worth the cost?
S&oslash;ren Marcus Pederson, a senior research fellow at Denmark's Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University in Frederiksberg, says surveys show that farmers are generally receptive to new technologies. But there has to be an economic advantage.
For example, using a small machine might require less fuel and would not compact the soil the way heavy machinery does. There is a cost associated with the labour needed to undo the compacting that occurs each year, says Pedersen.
But a cost advantage may be hard to see on low-value crops such as rice and corn.
"It's difficult for me to see a huge breakthrough in cereal crops. You have to start to focus on vegetables, potatoes and sugar beets, crops that have a relatively high value," says Pedersen.
Reliable?
And the robot's safety system would have to be reliable enough for it to operate autonomously.
"It's relatively costly to implement safety features on these robotic systems," he says.
"In principle, they can work the whole day, but if there is a requirement that it has to be attended, then you have to limit your time for using these systems."

There will still be fish on the menu, governments say, despite warnings that stocks will be depleted within 50 years
Governments and the UN food agency have cast serious doubts on a major scientific study that predicts all marine fish and seafood species face will collapse by 2048.
The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) says that the conservation effort must be improved.
But it says that it is "unlikely" there would be no seafood on consumers' plates by mid-century, calling the report "statistically dangerous". 
"Such a massive collapse ... would require reckless behaviour of all industries and governments for four decades, and an incredible level of apathy of all world citizens to let this happen, without mentioning economic forces that would discourage this from happening," says Serge Michel Garcia, director of the FAO's fishery resources division.
South Korea's fisheries ministry labelled the report "too radical", and says more scientific data is needed before heeding the call of environmentalists like Greenpeace to set aside 40% of oceans as marine reserves.
The cry for urgent action came in the wake of a report published in the current issue of the journal Science.
In the most exhaustive study conducted to date, US and Canadian researchers warned that overfishing and pollution threatened the accelerated loss of ocean species, ecosystems and human food supplies. 
The worldwide fishing industry currently extracts some 80 million tonnes of fish each year from the world's oceans, according to the FAO.
It represents a significant economic sector in many countries, including Scandinavia nations, where officials expressed scepticism about the report's conclusions.
"I don't think the oceans will be empty in 50 years time," says Helga Pedersen, the Norwegian minister of fisheries.
"That said, we have to work harder to secure sustainable management of fish stocks," she adds. 
Nordic fishing unions say industrial overfishing is not, in any case, the main culprit.
"Sure there are threatened species, but pollution is the main problem," says Lena Talvitie, vice-president of the Finnish federation of professional fishermen.
For environmentalists, however, the report's message was unequivocal. 
"Overfishing and pirate fishing are destroying our oceans at an alarming rate," says Greenpeace spokesman Nilesh Goundar in Australia. 
Some 29% of 8000 fished species were considered "collapsed" in 2003, that is, their catches had declined by 90% or more," says Assistant Professor Boris Worm of  Dalhousie University in Canada, lead author of the report.
The European Commission reacted by urging better international cooperation to turn around any doomsday scenario on the world's marine fish supply.

Mice engineered to have a low body temperature live longer, scientists show
Lowering the body temperature of mice without limiting the amount of food they eat can prolong their lives, a new study shows.
According to a study in the latest issue of the journal Science, female mice live up to 20% and males 12% longer.
"Our study shows it is possible to increase life span in mice by modest but prolonged lowering of core body temperature," says Bruno Conti, an associate professor at Scripps Research Institute in California, who led the study.
But it will take a long time to determine if the same applies to humans, the researchers say.
Scientists know that body temperature and ageing are linked in reptiles and other cold-blooded animals. 
They also know that the life span of warm-blooded creatures can be extended by reducing the number of calories they eat, which in turn lowers the body temperature by slowing down the metabolism.
So, the researchers carried out the study to determine whether calorie reduction is indeed responsible for extending animals' life, with a lowering of the body temperature being a secondary effect, or whether the latter is actually the cause of the increased longevity. 
They found that the increased life span is due to the lower body temperature, independent of the amount the mice eat.
Cooling down a mouse
In the study, the researchers lowered the body temperature of the mice 0.3-0.5&deg;C by genetically manipulating them.
They created mice that produce large amounts of a type of protein in the brain. This acts to heat up the brain's thermostat, a region of the hypothalamus. And the thermostat responds by reducing the core body temperature.
What about humans?
Professor Clifford Saper from the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center says that if core body temperature is critical in extending the life spans of mammals, "one might wonder whether 37&deg;C is indeed the optimal body temperature for humans, and why evolution has not selected for a lower body temperature and longer life span".
But before we look at manipulating how long humans live, he says "one would certainly want to know the consequences of hypothermia before pursuing it as a way to increase life span".

Could proposed new copyright laws restrict what you can get from a Google search?
Plugging a word or phrase into a search engine may soon give you fewer results if proposed new Australian copyright laws are adopted, according to internet giant Google.
The laws could open the way for Australian copyright owners to take action against search engines for caching and archiving material, Google says in a submission to a senate committee considering the legislation.
This could potentially limit the scope of the search engine results, which the internet company describes as effectively "condemning the Australian public to the pre-internet era".
Earlier this year the federal government announced its proposed changes to copyright law, which it says are designed to keep up with the rapidly changing digital landscape.
But in the submission to the senate legal and constitutional affairs committee, senior counsel and head of public policy at Google Inc, Andrew McLaughlin, says the changes fail to take into account the realities of the way in which information is processed and provided online.
"Google believes that the bill fails significantly to bring Australia's copyright act fully into the digital age," the submission says.
The internet company wants general "safety valve" provisions, as well as specific copyright exemptions, to protect search engines from falling foul of the law. 
"Given the vast size of the internet it is impossible for a search engine to contact personally each owner of a web page to determine whether the owner desires its web page to be searched, indexed or cached," Google submits.
"If such advance permission was required, the internet would promptly grind to a halt."
Google is also concerned about the effect of the copyright laws on digitisation projects, like its book search, which allows users to download books from the internet.
 Authors, news organisations and porn sites
Dr Matthew Rimmer, a copyright law expert from the Australian National University, says Google's concerns are justified and that the current laws haven't considered the crucial role search engines play in organising and providing information.
Google has already attracted legal action from the French press agency AFP, as well as authors and publishers in the US, he says.
The internet company is also appealing a decision which found in favour of a California pornographic company's breach of copyright claim against it.
Rimmer says internet search engines could be "crippled" by the proposed copyright changes, which protect libraries, archives and research institutions but leave commercial entities like Google out in the cold.
He says this will affect the ability of search engines to engage in digitisation projects like book search, provide images, index news stories and archive web content.
"Given the amount of litigation that Google has been involved in the last year I think they've got very genuine fears that they could be subject to copyright actions in Australia," he says.
He says rather than adopting the narrow "fair use" definitions contained in the legislation, Australia should adopt a US-style open-ended fair use defence to ensure a flow of and access to information.
"In the past when Google has been sued ... one of the things it did is take down its links and content.
"Google could very well become more reluctant to provide such comprehensive image and news services ... and with geo-identification technology you can also offer certain content in some countries and not others."
A spokesperson for attorney general Philip Ruddock says the committee has received 70 submissions, including one from Google, and all would be taken into account when considering the legislation.
"We will take on board all the submissions and the committee will take their views into account when they do their report," he says.
Submissions will be discussed at a public hearing in Canberra today.

Scientists hope they have a new way of tackling HIV/AIDS a bit like a Trojan Horse. They've engineered a 'faulty' version of HIV, infused it into the body and watched as it replicated harmless versions of itself
An AIDS virus genetically engineered to fight other AIDS viruses has worked better than expected, suppressing the virus and renewing the immune systems of a few patients, researchers report. 
The study involved just five people but the surprising results offer new hope both for the field of gene therapy and for treating the fatal and incurable AIDS virus.
But such an approach needs years more study, the researchers caution.
"The goal of this phase I trial was safety and feasibility and the results established that," says Dr Carl June of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, who led the study.
"But the results also hint at something much more," he adds. 
"It seemed to have a vaccine-like effect in that the immune system was better in most of the patients than when they enrolled. We are trying to study the mechanism." 
HIV infects close to 40 million people worldwide and has killed 25 million. A cocktail of drugs can help control infection, but there is no cure and no vaccine.
The drugs can cause severe side-effects in some patients and the virus can evolve resistance, so that patients have to move to new drug combinations.
Gene therapy is a promising but troubled field of research based on the premise that altering genes can cure disease.
It has cured only a few patients, and some have developed leukaemia as a consequence. One gene therapy volunteer died in 1999. 
June's team tried a new gene therapy approach, first crippling the HIV virus, they report today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
"The virus is gutted so that it only has half the size of the original or pathogenic virus," June says.
Antisense approach
The so-called envelope gene remains, and is reversed, a manipulation called antisense.
The researchers then recruited five patients with HIV who were beginning to fail treatment. Their drugs no longer worked and the virus was beginning to damage their immune systems. 
June's team removed the immune cells, CD4 T-cells, that HIV attacks. The researchers infected the CD4 cells in the lab with their newly engineered antisense HIV virus, then infused them back onto the patients.
When HIV or any other virus infects a cell, it injects its own genetic material into the cell. The cell is turned into a virus factory, sometimes pumping out thousands of copies of a virus before it explodes.
After the new antisense virus was infused, newly infected cells pumped out defective virus, June says. 
"The virus particles that are released are, like, sterile. They are nonpathogenic," June says. 
Safety first
This test was meant only to show that the approach was safe, and three years later, none of the patients show ill effects. 
The treatment appears to have helped restore the immune systems of four of the five patients, and the virus remains partly suppressed. 
"We put back more [CD4 cells] than we took out. We don't know if that is why their immune system gets better, because there are more soldiers, or whether it got better because of better antiviral effects," June says. 
The therapy is being developed by Gaithersburg, Maryland-based VIRxSYS Corp and the studies are partly paid for by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. 
Phase II trials are under way in HIV patients who have disease well-controlled by drugs. June says it is not yet clear if the treatment could work only in infected patients, or might even be used as a preventive vaccine some day.

The aircraft's 'belly' has been designed to improve lift
Plans for a new generation of silent aircraft, designed to slash noise output while also cutting fuel consumption, have been unveiled by UK and US aeronautics experts.
The single-wing aircraft would hold 250 passengers and use 25% less fuel than the current average, say its creators who hope to have it flying commercially by 2030.
The Silent Aircraft Initiative (SAI) has since 2003 gathered some 40 researchers from the University of Cambridge and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as well as an array of aeronautics-linked firms.
As well as cutting engine noise, the designers focused on adapting the structure of the aircraft, which is responsible for half of the noise a plane creates on landing.
To do this they created a single flying wing, with the body of the aircraft also functioning to give lift.
This allows a slower approach which reduces noise as well as improving fuel efficiency at cruising altitudes, the researchers say.
The new plane also does away with flaps, a major source of noise, while the undercarriage has been simplified and its aerodynamics improved.
The engines are mounted on the top of the aircraft, to screen much noise from the ground.
Some backers of the project admit to having had doubts at first about its viability.
"My first reaction on hearing of the Silent Aircraft Initiative was profound scepticism," says Dr John Green of Greener by Design, which promotes environmentally-friendly air transport options.
"Three years on, I have to concede that the SAI has surpassed my expectations by quite a margin.  The team has produced a ... credible design that is predicted to meet the original target."

There are concerns that a merger between two Sydney museums will eat up resources
International researchers are so concerned about the proposed merger between the Australian and Powerhouse museums that they are urging the government to drop its plans.
In letters to New South Wales arts minister Bob Debus obtained by ABC Science Online, they say a merger would jeopardise scientific research.
The government wants to bring both museums under one board and integrate them "at a functional level", according to a letter Debus sent to the president of the Australian Museum Trust, Brian Sherman, in August.
Professor Victor Springer, of the Smithsonian Institute's National Museum of Natural History, says such a move could jeopardise the Australian Museum's worldwide contribution to science.
"I ask you with the most sincere and profound concern to ensure that neither the quantity nor the quality of the scientific research capacity at the Australian Museum suffers as a result of the proposed merger," he says.
Others, including Professor Lee Fuiman, director of the University of Texas Marine Science Institute, and senior curator at the Royal Ontario Museum, Dr Richard Winterbottom, have also appealed for the government to drop the merger plans.
"It appears to me that if this merger were to proceed, scientific research at the Australian Museum would be marginalised or might even disappear," Fuiman writes.
Professor Richard Rosenblatt, of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California San Diego, writes that he is concerned "the proposed merger ... will result in a loss of scientific research capacity and positions".
Australian scientists also concerned
Scientists from the University of Sydney, University of Wollongong and the Australian Marine Sciences Association have also written to express concern, as has a delegation of prominent members of the science community that is understood to have presented the government with a petition last week.
Their concerns are understood to include the fact that the Powerhouse and Australian museums have a separate history, manage different collections and have diverse research priorities.
In a letter to scientists, Debus says the government is doing a feasibility study to examine the "benefits, costs and issues" associated with combining the boards of the two museums.
He says the need to protect their expertise is a paramount concern and that the government is taking a "careful and considered approach to this matter".
But the Public Service Association of New South Wales, which represents some of the 550 staff at both museums, has described the move as a cost-cutting exercise and fait accompli that will go ahead regardless of the outcome of the study.
Director of the Australian Museum, Frank Howarth, was not available to comment.
Scorpion fish and tiny vertebrates
Among research at the Australian Museum has been the discovery of a new species of scorpion fish in Sydney Harbour and what could be the world's smallest vertebrate, the stout infantfish (Schindleria brevipinguis), in the Great Barrier Reef.
A staff member at the Australian Museum, speaking on the condition of anonymity, says there are fears that research will be cut altogether or at least downgraded under an amalgamation.
"The Powerhouse Museum doesn't have a scientific research component like we do and it would be easy to say this doesn't fit  into the new model so let's get rid of [research] all together," he says.
"There's a school of thought that says this stuff should be at universities."
He says five of the museum's 20 designated research positions are vacant and are almost certain not to be renewed in the event of a merger.
Staff have already begun looking elsewhere because of uncertainty about the museum's future, he says.
One scientist, a world leader in his field, is understood to have already accepted a job at the Natural History Museum in London.
Report due
Dr Des Griffin, who resigned in 1998 after 22 years as director of the Australian Museum, says the plan to bring the two bodies under a new, single governing body will have little benefit for either the museums or the public.
He says all areas, including scientific research, social history and collection conservation, are likely to be hit.
A steering committee consisting of departmental and museum representatives is due to report to the government on the amalgamation plan on 22 November.
The report comes amid uncertainty about how the amalgamation will proceed when Debus, who recently announced his retirement, quits parliament at the state election in  March.

The solar flare was hundreds of thousands times more powerful than this one, a typical solar flare from our Sun seen in 2005. The II Pegasi flare was too distant to image in detail
The most colossal x-ray flare ever detected has been caught in the act of zapping its solar system with planet-killing radiation.
The star is II Pegasi in the constellation Pegasus, about 135 light-years from Earth. 
That means the explosive flare seen by the NASA Swift satellite, designed to detect much more distant and powerful gamma-ray bursts, took place around the year 1871. Light from the event is only now reaching Earth.
The x-ray flare is the first-ever detected beyond our own Sun that bears a striking resemblance to the much smaller 'x-class' flares generated occasionally by our own Sun.
"It's a hundred thousand times more powerful than the largest solar flares ever recorded," says astronomer Dr Steven Drake of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center.
Despite being far more powerful, it looks like it was created in the same way, he says.
It starts with a tangle of magnetic field lines on the surface of a star that short-circuits. When that happens, atomic particles are accelerated to speeds only seen on Earth in high-tech particle accelerators.
The accelerated particles can emit gamma rays, which is what caught the Swift satellite's attention in the first place.
When the satellite turned to face II Pegasi, it took aim with its x-ray detector and caught the hour-long eruption of x-rays.
Violent eruption
The x-rays were created as material violently erupted from the star and then arched back down and slammed back onto its surface.
By comparison, x-ray flares on the Sun last only second or minutes, at most.
"It's certainly one of the biggest ever seen," says Drake about the II Pegasi flare. It's the hands-down winner in terms of those seen in 'soft' x-rays, which are the rays just beyond the wavelength of extreme ultraviolet light.
Drake is a co-author on a paper on the flare that is being presented by the University of Maryland's Dr Rachel Osten at a meeting in Pasadena this week.
Flaming star
What's less surprising about the flare, however, is that it originated from II Pegasi, says Pennsylvania State University astrophysicist Professor Eric Feigelson.
"It's known to be one of the most flaring stars," says Feigelson. If he had been asked to guess which nearby stars were capable of belting out such a flare, II Pegasi would have been among his top 10, he says.
Despite being a middle-aged star that ought to be past this sort of wild and violent behaviour, II Pegasi is part of a tightly-bound two-star system in which the stars are roaring around each other, generating powerful tidal forces that keep II Pegasi riled up.
Fortunately our own Sun is relatively quiet and stable, with x-ray flares that are unable to penetrate Earth's atmosphere.

The bill lifts a ban on therapeutic cloning, allowing the creation of human embryos for research
Australian scientists will not be allowed to use animal eggs to create embryonic stem cells under a bill passed by the Senate this week.
For now, this rules out creating 'hybrid' human-animal cells for human disease research in Australia.
Despite this, top stem cell researchers have welcomed the bill, which lifts a ban on therapeutic cloning by allowing the creation of human embryos specifically for research.
The bill, which will now go before the House of Representatives, allows a process called somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT).
This involves removing the nucleus from an egg and replacing it with one from a non-reproductive body cell, of a patient for example, to produce an embryo, the same method used to produce Dolly the sheep.
Under the bill, narrowly passed by two votes in the Senate, SCNT embryos will not be implanted, but used to produce embryonic stem cells and then destroyed after 14 days.
The Lockhart report late last year called for amendments to Australian cloning law to allow therapeutic cloning using SCNT, and it recommended that both human and animal eggs be permitted for use in research.
But the bill passed this week rules out the use of an animal egg as a host for a human nucleus.
It comes at the same time that researchers in the UK are requesting permission to use cow eggs fused with human material for research on Parkinson's, stroke and Alzheimer's.
Lockhart committee member, Professor Loane Skene from the University of Melbourne, says the committee recommended that animal eggs be used in research to reduce the demand on women for eggs.
"It's an invasive procedure for a woman to donate an egg and the eggs are very precious," says Skene. "So we thought it would be better to allow another source of eggs, namely animal eggs, to be used."
"It was never envisaged that any stem cells that were produced from this would go into treatments for people."
Bill welcomed despite animal egg ban
Despite the ban on animal eggs, leading stem cell researchers have welcomed the bill.
Professor Bernie Tuch of the University of New South Wales in Sydney says the decision is as momentous as the assassination of US president John F Kennedy.
"Reason has prevailed," says Tuch, who is quietly confident the bill will pass the House of Representatives.
Professor Alan Trounson of Monash University in Melbourne says the decision is consistent with public opinion show by surveys to be 60-80% in favour of therapeutic cloning.
"I'm very pleased," he says.
But Trounson says the decision to ban the use of animal eggs will limit research.
He says research using animal eggs helps understand the factors in cells that are responsible for reprogramming it to become pluripotent, capable of turning into many other kinds of cells.
And he says the hope is that these factors could one day be identified and made synthetically, thus eliminating the need for embryos altogether in stem cell research.
But he says thousands of eggs are required to sequence and identify the factors and there are just not enough human eggs for this. 
"You can't get thousands of human eggs to extract the factors," he says.
Tuch is less concerned about a shortage of eggs.
He says one possible source will be the 240 women a year that have their ovaries removed because a genetic predisposition to ovarian cancer.
Trading eggs?
Trounson says eggs will be gathered internationally for research to find suitable embryonic stem cell lines.
A sociologist who studies the global trade in human and animal tissue, Peta Cook of the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane says it's this international context that needs to be considered when it comes to the pressures on women to sell their eggs.
While this is illegal in Australia, Cook says there is a booming international trade in body parts.
"If I need a kidney, I can travel to Pakistan or India and receive one from a live donor," she says. "It is close to an on-demand system."
Similarly, women in Eastern Europe have had their eggs taken illicitly and sold by health-care professionals, says Cook.
She says that in the US a woman can sell her eggs for up to US$10,000 and this is very tempting to poor university students and such financial incentives can undermine informed consent and autonomous decision-making.

Climate changes in Greenland over the past 150,000 years are reflected in Antarctica, scientists show. They say the link is a conveyor belt of ocean currents that links north and south
Antarctica and Greenland may be at opposite ends of the planet but their climate systems appear to be linked by a remarkable ocean current, a study shows.
The results, published today in the journal Nature, suggest that Antarctica's ice could eventually start to melt because of localised warming in the far North Atlantic. 
The evidence comes from a 2500 metre ice core, drilled by European scientists at Dronning Maud Land, on the part of Antarctica that faces the South Atlantic.
With its compacted layers of ice and telltale concentrations of methane in trapped air bubbles, the core yields a picture of snowfall and atmospheric temperatures going back 150,000 years. 
Even better than that, it can be matched with cores of similar amplitude drilled in the Greenland icesheet.
Put together, the cores provide the first solid evidence to back a theory that millennial scale climate changes that have unfolded in the far north and south of the Atlantic are not isolated, local events, but linked. 
The glacial climate in the Northern Atlantic can swing extraordinarily rapidly, with temperatures rising by 8-16&deg;C within the space of a few decades at the end of each Ice Age and falling back, albeit more slowly, when the next Ice Age beckons.
Antarctica, though, has far smaller temperature shifts, of between 1-3&deg;C, and these unfold over millennia.
But the two sets of ice cores point to what the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica scientists describe as a bipolar seesaw
In short, what happens at one end of the Atlantic has a huge effect on the other, although at different time scales and in different ways. 
The cause appears to be a conveyor-belt system of ocean flows.
On the conveyor belt 
Relative heat from the Southern Ocean around Antarctica is picked up by a complex system called the meridional overturning circulation (MOC), of which the Gulf Stream is the best-known component. 
The MOC channels warm surface water up to the North Atlantic, coincidentally enabling countries in northwestern Europe to have a balmy climate despite their northerly latitude. 
When this warm water reaches the far north, it cools and sinks, and the MOC sends it back south, back down towards Antarctica, at depths far below the ocean's surface. 
"Our data shows that the degree of warming in the south is linearly related to the duration of cold periods in the North Atlantic," says lead author Dr Hubertus Fischer of Germany's Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research in Bremerhaven.
Understanding this link also sheds light on what the researchers say is a troubling aspect about human-induced climate change: the fate of Antarctica, where the world's biggest store of frozen water is held.
"Today, Antarctica is still a reservoir of cold. We don't see any contribution to global sea-level change because of Antarctica, it's not melting yet. In fact there has been more precipitation and some models suggest that Antarctica actually will grow a little," Fischer says. 
That reassuring scenario could change if, as some studies are now tentatively suggesting, the MOC is beginning to falter, says Fischer. 
The causes for this slowing of the Atlantic conveyor belt could be a run-off of cold water from melting Siberian permafrost or the Greenland icesheet, triggered by rising atmospheric temperatures.
But any disruption would lead to a build-up of warmer water off Antarctica, according to the conveyor-belt theory.
"If the thermohaline [ocean convection] circulation in the Atlantic slows down just a little, it would cause a warming in the Southern Ocean," Fischer says. 
"And if you have warming around Antarctica, at a certain point, the fringes of Antarctica will even warm over the melting point. Then we could start to see melting at the borders and run-off and that would contribute to sea-level rise."

Transplanted photoreceptor cell shown in green against a background of the host's retina
Scientists have restored the sight of blind mice by transplanting light-sensitive cells into their eyes, a new study shows.
The mice suffered from eye damage called photoreceptor loss, which occurs in macular degeneration, the leading cause of sight loss in the elderly, and other eye disorders.
But instead of using stem cells, which could form into any cell type, the scientists transplanted cells that had reached a later stage of development towards becoming photoreceptor cells.
The international team publishes its results today in the journal Nature.
"We have shown for the first time that it is possible to transplant photoreceptors," says lead author Dr Robert MacLaren, a scientist and eye surgeon at Moorfields Eye Hospital in London.
"These cells are lost in some of the more common causes of blindness," he adds.
The scientists believe further research could lead to the first human retinal cell transplants for people with blinding diseases within a decade.
Photoreceptors are specialised light sensitive cells that line the back of the eye and are essential for sight. In eye diseases such as macular degeneration the cells are destroyed.
Previous studies that had used stem cells, master cells that have the potential to become any type of cell in the body, had failed because the cells did not form into photoreceptors.
Researchers had thought that the mature retina, the part of the eye that senses light and forms images, did not have the capacity for repair.
MacLaren and his collaborators showed using precursor cells that are already programmed to become photoreceptors, but are not quite there yet, was the key to successful transplantation.
"We have taken them out of the donor retina and transplanted them into a host retina extremely quickly at that precise point in time and with minimal trauma to the surrounding tissue," MacLaren explains. 
The mice had eye diseases caused by genetic defects. 
Scientists have recently found cells on the margin of the retina in humans that have stem-cell like properties and could potentially be grown in the lab to become photoreceptor precursor cells for treatment.
"Rather than focusing on stem cells we believed that if we could understand how cells develop and become photoreceptors ... our transplantation efforts would meet with greater success," says Professor Anand Swaroop, of the University of Michigan Medical School and a co-author of the study.
"This technique gives us new insights in repairing damage to the retina and possibly other parts of the central nervous system," he adds.

Online searches can help doctors keep up to date with an increasing pool of medical research
It's not just patients who are frantically plugging their symptoms into Google to see what disease they might have. Australian researchers say doctors are doing it too.
Dr Hangwi Tang and Dr Jennifer Ng of the Princess Alexandra Hospital in Brisbane report their findings today online in the British Medical Journal.
Tang says the study was driven by personal curiosity after noticing how patients and doctors alike were using Google to diagnose difficult cases.
In one example he had a patient whose father used the search engine to correctly diagnose that his son had the rare circulatory condition Paget-von Schrtter syndrome.
Tang and Ng selected 26 difficult cases presented in the New England Journal of Medicine, including Cushing's syndrome, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, encephalitis and cirrhosis.
They then plugged the symptoms of each case into the search engine to come up with a diagnosis.
When these diagnoses were compared with the correct published diagnoses, the researchers found that Google got it right 58% of the time.
They say an online search is likely to be more effective at helping to diagnose conditions with unique symptoms that can be used as search terms.
Tang says part of the challenge in using Google is to be able to efficiently sift through the many pages of links that you get from an online search.
And he thinks that doctors are better placed than patients at doing this because they are better at selecting relevant links.
"I don't think Google can replace doctors, in other words," says Tang.
Millions of facts
Doctors have been estimated to carry two million facts in their heads to help them to diagnose disease, the researchers say.
But search engines allow them to get quick access to an ever increasing medical knowledge base that might be impossible to hold in their head.
Google in particular gives access to more than three billion articles, they say, with Google Scholar restricting searches to peer reviewed articles.
Tang says while there are a number of other search engines that clinicians can use, they often prefer Google because it is so easy to use and freely available.
Other studies
Professor Johanna Westbrook of the Centre for Health Informatics in Sydney says the findings are consistent with her own.
Her team looked at how specialised search engines could help clinicians to both diagnose and treat patients, using the best available evidence.
The study found clinicians were 21% more likely to give the correct answers when they used online search engines.
Interestingly though, a few clinicians got the wrong answers using the search engines, although they got the right answers without them.
Westbrook says this underscores the importance of learning how to interpret complex evidence.
Another interesting finding was that clinical nurse consultants using the search engines were just as accurate as doctors.
Westbrook says this suggests search engines might help such nurses to diagnose and treat patients in rural areas where there are fewer doctors.
"[An online search engine is] available 24 hours a day," she says. "Whereas you can't get a clinician 24 hours a day. You can't get to a hospital library 24 hours a day."
Westbrook says that while Google might be good for helping find information about diseases with unique symptoms, more sophisticated search engines would be required for more complex diseases.

A gene type that governs brain size, which may have had a Neanderthal origin, exists in modern humans
Neanderthals may have given the modern humans who replaced them a priceless gift, a gene that helped them develop superior brains, US researchers report.
And the only way they could have provided that gift would have been by interbreeding, say the scientists. 
Their study, published online in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences this week, provides indirect evidence that modern Homo sapiens and Neanderthals interbred at some point when they lived side by side in Europe.
"Finding evidence of mixing is not all that surprising. But our study demonstrates the possibility that interbreeding contributed advantageous variants into the human gene pool that subsequently spread," says Professor Bruce Lahn, a Howard Hughes Medical Institute researcher at the University of Chicago who led the study.
Scientists have been debating whether Neanderthals, who died out about 35,000 years ago, ever bred with modern H. sapiens. Neanderthals are considered more primitive, with robust bones but a smaller intellects than modern humans.
Lahn's team found a brain gene that appears to have entered the human lineage about 1.1 million years ago.
It has a modern form, or allele, that appeared about 37,000 years ago, right before Neanderthals became extinct.
"The gene microcephalin (MCPH1) regulates brain size during development and has experienced positive selection in the lineage leading to Homo sapiens," the researchers write. 
Positive selection means the gene conferred some sort of advantage, so that people who had it were more likely to have descendants than people who did not.
A common variant
Lahn's team estimate that 70% of all living humans have this type D variant of the gene.
"By no means do these findings constitute definitive proof that a Neanderthal was the source of the original copy of the D allele. However, our evidence shows that it is one of the best candidates," Lahn says. 
The researchers reached their conclusions by doing a statistical analysis of the DNA sequence of microcephalin, which is known to play a role in regulating brain size in humans.
Mutations in the human gene cause development of a much smaller brain, a condition called microcephaly. 
By tracking smaller, more regular mutations, the researchers looked at DNA's genetic clock and dated the original genetic variant to 37,000 years ago. 
They note that this D allele is very common in Europe, where Neanderthals lived, and more rare in Africa, where they did not.
What's the advantage?
Lahn says it is not yet clear what advantage the D allele gives the human brain.
"The D alleles may not even change brain size; they may only make the brain a bit more efficient if it indeed affects brain function," he says. 
Now his team is looking for evidence of Neanderthal origin for other human genes.

Each of these spawning sea urchins share more than 7000 genes with humans
Scientists who have sequenced the genome of the sea urchin say these brainless and limbless invertebrates are surprisingly similar to humans.
They found that the California purple sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) genome has 23,300 genes.
And it shares 7077 of them with humans.
The genetic ties are far closer than scientists expect and make the sea urchin a closer genetic cousin of humans than the worm or fruit fly, according to the study in today's issue of the journal Science. 
"Nobody would've predicted that sea urchins have such a robust gene set for visual perception," says Gary Wessel, a Brown University biology professor and member of the Sea Urchin Genome Sequencing Consortium.
"I've been looking at these organisms for 31 years, and now I know they were looking back at me." 
Among other surprises from the project were that researchers found sea urchins have the most sophisticated innate immune system of any animal studied to date.
They say this may be one reason they live 100 years or more. 
Sea urchins also carry genes associated with human diseases such as muscular dystrophy and Huntington's. 
The creatures also have genes associated with taste, smell, hearing and balance, the study found.

