So what would turn H5N1 into a pandemic virus?
First and foremost, it would need mutations in the spike, the haemagglutinin molecule, to enable the virus to bind to cells in the upper respiratory tract. 
This would enable the virus to spread via coughs and sneezes and nasal mucus, which are caused by irritation to the upper airways. 
To boost its pandemic potential, the virus also needs changes in its PB2 gene, which controls an enzyme essential for efficient reproduction. 
"Nobody knows whether the virus will evolve into a pandemic strain, but flu viruses constantly change," says Kawaoka. 
"Certainly, multiple mutations need to be accumulated for the H5N1 to become a pandemic strain." 
The findings suggest scientists and public health agencies may have more time to prepare for an eventual pandemic of avian influenza, the team believes. 
Kawaoka's team exposed various tissues from the human respiratory tract to a range of viruses in lab dishes. 
The viruses were the human strains H1N1 and H3N2 and the bird strains H3N2 and H4N6. In addition, there were two H5N1 samples, one taken from a human victim in Hong Kong and one from a duck in Vietnam. 
Flu viruses reproduce sloppily, which induces slight changes in their genetic code. This movement is called antigenic drift, and explains why seasonal flu viruses keep changing and new updated vaccines are needed. 
But they can also make big changes, called antigenic shift, in which new genes are brought in, thus creating a new pathogen against which no one has immunity. A novel flu virus that emerged after World War I killed as many as 50 million people. 
By closely monitoring viruses from people infected with avian flu, scientists can get a early warning as to whether these strains are mutating into forms that will make it easier to fit into human receptors, Kawaoka says.

The headaches, colds and sniffles associated with 'sick building syndrome' are more likely a sign of poor work satisfaction, a new study shows
So-called sick building syndrome does not exist, according to a UK study that suggests its cold-like symptoms can be mainly pinned to job stress, dissatisfaction and poor office relationships.
Dr Mai Stafford, of University College London, and colleagues publish their findings today in the journal Occupational and Environmental Medicine.
The research is part of the prestigious Whitehall study, a wider body of work looking at the health of public servants.
Sick building syndrome is a popular yet vague term to describe headaches, coughs, tired or itchy eyes, runny noses or inexplicable tiredness that are usually blamed on poor air quality in the office.
More than 4000 UK public servants, aged 42-62 and working in 44 different buildings across London, were questioned about their health. 
They were asked to list any symptoms of sick building syndrome, the physical properties of their offices and the demands of their job, including levels of support at work. 
Separately, the buildings were also assessed by independent field workers. 
They checked temperature, lighting intensity, levels of airborne bacteria, fungi and dust, humidity, ventilation flow, noise level and concentrations of CO2 and airborne organic chemicals. 
One in seven of the men and nearly one in five of the women respondents reported five or more symptoms of the syndrome. 
Hot, dry and dusty
There was some evidence, but minor, that those who reported high levels of the symptoms worked in offices that were too hot and dry and had relatively high levels of airborne germs and dust. 
But those with only low levels of the symptoms worked in buildings where there was poor air circulation and unacceptably high levels of CO2, noise, fungus and airborne chemicals. 
In fact, the biggest factors linked with the symptoms were job stress and lack of support in the workplace.
"'Sick building syndrome' may be wrongly named," say the authors. 
"Raised symptom reporting appears to be due less to poor physical conditions than to a working environment characterised by poor psychosocial conditions." 
A long line of research
Previously research has highlighted a link between ill health and control over work, job demands, work overload and job category. 
If sick building syndrome may not exist, its symptoms do, and they cost companies dearly in lost production, the paper says.
It says the lesson for bosses is that when such symptoms come to light, they should consider causes that go beyond the office's physical design and operation and delve into more complex areas, such as job roles and the autonomy of the workforce.

Dissolving CO2 deep in the oceans needs to be considered, says a German expert who is calling for more research
Pumping carbon dioxide into the oceans may be one way to help save us from global warming, says a chemical engineer who admits the subject is "taboo".
Professor Wolfgang Arlt, who has been visiting Australia's Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne, says governments see this so-called ocean sequestration as too politically risky, compared to geosequestration, when CO2 emissions are buried underground.
Since ocean sequestration was first proposed 20 years ago, Arlt says it has been the subject of relatively little research, and he is calling for more.
"I want to have every option equally researched," he says, emphasising that reduction of CO2 emissions is the first priority before any form of sequestration.
Alrt, who is based at the University of Erlangen-Nuremburg in Germany, stresses he is not supporting ocean sequestration, only its investigation as an option to help stop global warming.
Arlt's speciality includes the science of separating different chemicals such as CO2 and air and he calls ocean sequestration "the natural option".
"Nature does it already," he says. "If you look at our total emissions of carbon dioxide, one part is stored in the air, and the other part is dissolved in the ocean."
The oceans are Earth's main buffer system, he says.
He says increased concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has led to increased amounts of the gas dissolved in the surface of the ocean and this in turn has led to an increase in ocean acidity that is harmful to marine life.
Going deeper
But, says Arlt, his initial calculations suggest ocean sequestration does not have to significantly increase the acidity of the oceans as long as the CO2 is injected deep into the ocean and is mixed across the whole planet.
Arlt says CO2 can be injected into "down-welling" areas of the ocean and, in its dissolved form, will tend to stay at the bottom of the ocean where it can then be mixed by deep ocean currents across the planet.
He says one modelling exercise suggests CO2 injected near Europe will be distributed as far as Australia in 100 years time.
Arlt says he predicts that the effect on ocean acidity using this method would be so small it would be unmeasurable, and would not affect sea life on the ocean bottom. But he thinks this should be investigated further.
He says another option is to neutralise the CO2 before sequestering it in the oceans by mixing it with alkaline minerals such as limestone.
IPCC warns on ocean acidification
A recent report on CO2 capture and storage from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) canvasses options for ocean sequestration but does not include Arlt's argument.
The report says ocean sequestration could help lock up CO2 for hundreds of years, with deeper injection being more effective than shallower injection.
But it warns increased acidity at the ocean surface can harm marine organisms.
The report does not mention Arlt's point about down-welling waters and deep ocean currents.
Alrt says the IPCC had wanted him to co-author the report, but because of time problems he did not contribute. 
"So my ideas are not inside the report," he says.
The IPCC report notes that the effect of increased CO2 in the deep ocean has yet to be studied.
Whole range of options
An Australian co-author of the IPCC report, Dr Peter Cook, chief executive of the Co-operative Research Centre for Greenhouse Gas Technologies, agrees little is known about ocean sequestration and more research is always good.
"We're going to need the whole range of options for decreasing CO2 emissions," he says.
But he says the IPCC took a "very cautious view" about the future of ocean sequestration.
"We have to be very careful about doing it before we have a great deal more information," Cook says.

Drainage from the southernmost dome of Greenland
Polar ice sheets are melting faster than expected and could push sea levels up as much as 6 metres by 2100, scientists warn in two studies released today.
Based on current warming trends, they say, average temperatures could jump at least 2.5&deg;C by the end of the century, resembling the last great global warming surge 129,000 years ago when seas rose as much. 
Professor Jonathan Overpeck of the University of Arizona and Dr Bette Otto-Bliesner of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, co-wrote both studies, which appear in the latest issue of the journal Science.
They used a computer model for future climate predictions and ice sheet simulations to create a picture of the Earth's climate 129,000 years ago. 
They also used climate-indicative data from sediments, fossils and ice cores. 
They conclude that the melting of ice sheets in Greenland and in the Antarctic today resembles what happened back then, and that the risk of a comparable rise in sea level is high. 
"Although the focus of our work is polar, the implications are global. These ice sheets melted before and sea levels rose. The warmth needed isn't that much above present conditions," Otto-Bliesner says. 
Dynamic maps of the projected results of the rise in sea levels are available on Overpeck's website.
Call for action
Overpeck says we need to act soon.
"We need to start serious measures to reduce greenhouse gases within the next decade. If we don't do something soon, we're committed to 4-6 metres of sea level rise in the future," he says. 
A conservative estimate would call for sea level rises of 1 metre per century, he says.
He cautioned, however, that this estimate assumes the Earth will get only as hot as it did 129,000 years ago when the ice sheets melted. 
The earlier ice melt was concentrated in the Northern Hemisphere in the summer months, and was due largely to changes in Earth's orbit, he says. 
"The climate warming we're in now is global and it's year-round and it's due to human influences on the climate system," he says.
"That will be more damaging to the ice sheets than the that warming we had 130,000 years ago." 
The ice sheets are already melting, accelerated by relatively warm water that eats away at them, says NASA glacier expert Dr Bob Bindschadler.
"It's not really a debate any more about whether sea level is rising or not. I think the debate has shifted to, how rapidly is sea level rising," he says.

The research behind the 2006 Abel Prize for maths explains how violin strings vibrate
The world's most prestigious maths prize has been awarded to a Swedish researcher for his work on wave patterns.
Professor Lennart Carleson of the Royal Institute of Technology in Sweden was awarded the Abel Prize for maths for his work on the Fourier series.
This says that everything from the vibration of violin strings to the spread of heat through a metal bar can be viewed as sums of simple wave patterns, oscillating sine and cosine waves.
This led to the branch of maths known as harmonic analysis.
He also solved the so-called corona problem, which looks at structures that show up around a disc when the disc itself is hidden.
An example might be the corona of the Sun seen during an eclipse, when it's hidden by the Moon.
The prize, which is awarded by the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, is often described as the 'Nobel' prize for maths.
The prize rules say it should aim to spur interest in mathematics among children and young people. So far, all winners of the prize have been in their 70s.

This pattern of spirals was made using a computer that analysed someone's voice
An Australian digital artist is using his voice to design textiles.
Pierre Proske has developed computer software that translates different frequencies in someone's voice into spiral patterns, producing what he calls 'voiceprints'.
Proske developed the software while doing his masters in art and technology at Sweden's IT University of Göteborg.
He's used the software to design a pattern inspired by elements of Japanese textiles, a design that appeals to him because of its simple repeated elements.
"Computer code is very simple and minimalistic, you have these ones and zeros, so I thought it would be good to choose a very minimalistic textile as well."
The textile is made up of repeated spirals of more or less the same size in a particular dense and fairly regular arrangement (see image below). 
Proske then scanned one of the spirals into his computer as the basic element in his voiceprint design.
Next he used the software to analyse the frequency profile of a short sample of a voice.
"You might get a bunch of low frequencies and some high frequencies depending on what you say and how you say it," he says.
The software translates the relative amounts of different frequencies of a particular sound into a particular layout of spirals of different sizes.
Different voice sounds can create different layouts of the spirals, says Proske.
He says the software could be used to generate patterns for textile and graphic design.
"The idea is that it is actually meant to be quite accessible. Anybody could use their voice to generate these patterns."
Proske sees his research as a modern take on old technologies.
"I'm kind of inspired by the connection of textiles and computers because they have a historical link that goes back to the automation of the loom in the 1800s," he says. 
Proske says the same punched cardboard cards used to code for textile patterns were later used to program the first computers.

Chocolate may give you short-term pleasure if you crave it. But it's not an antidepressant, as many people think
Chocoholics can happily eat chocolate for pleasure, but for those who are stressed and clinically depressed, the high is short-lived and chocolate may even deepen the downer, a review shows.
The findings, which will be published in the Journal of Affective Disorders, fly in the face of the myth that chocolate is an antidepressant.
The analysis, which is the most comprehensive literature review on how chocolate affects mood, shows that the motivation behind eating chocolate determines which neurotransmitters are activated, and hence your mood.
The review's Australian authors, from the Black Dog Institute at the Prince of Wales Hospital in Sydney, identified two groups of chocolate eaters based on motivation.
They identified the cravers, who eat chocolate as an indulgent pleasure, and the emotional eaters, who use chocolate in a bid to alleviate depression.
Professor Gordon Parker, executive director of the Black Dog Institute and lead author, says cravers see chocolate like a good glass of wine, and anticipating and eating the treat releases 'feel good' neurotransmitters. 
"Chocolate craving as an indulgent pleasure seems to stimulate the dopamine system in the brain, and provides an enjoyable experience," he says.
"But the emotional eaters, people who eat chocolate to relieve boredom, stress or clinical depression, are looking for an opioid effect to improve their mood."
For them, at best chocolate only provides temporary relief, he says. But this is quickly followed by a return to or a worsening of their earlier negative state.
Consuming sweet foods is thought to release the neurotransmitter beta-endorphin in the hypothalamus, which is said to have an opiate effect on the body. 
But why the chocolate high is so transient and insufficient to sustain mood in those who eat it for emotional reasons remains unknown. 
Busting the myth
The theory that chocolate acts as an antidepressant comes from the common belief that a serotonin deficiency causes chocolate cravings, but the review found no support for this hypothesis.
"It is true that chocolate acts on the same neurological system as serotonin. But you'd have to eat a truck load of chocolate before you have had the equivalent of one antidepressant tablet," Parker says.
"Our review rejects any possibility that chocolate desired as a way of relieving stress or when feeling down has any antidepressant benefit."  
Stimulants such as caffeine, theobromine, tyramine and phenylethylamine, are also present in concentrations too low to have any significant psychoactive effect, the review says.
For more information about depression, including fact sheets, support and referrals, see the websites for beyondblue, Australia's national depression initiative, and depressioNet.

If this research applies to humans, scientists might have another source of stem cells
Scientists have isolated sperm-producing stem cells from adult mice that have similar properties to embryonic stem cells.
If the same type of cells in humans show similar qualities the German researchers believe the cells could be used in stem cell research.
This would remove the ethical dilemma associated with stem cells derived from human embryos. 
"These isolated spermatogonial stem cells respond to culture conditions and acquire embryonic stem cell properties," say Professor Gerd Hasenfuss and his colleagues from the Georg-August-University of G&ouml;ttingen online in the journal Nature. 
Stem cells are master cells that have the potential to develop into any cell type in the body.
And some scientists believe they could act as a type of repair system to provide new therapies for illnesses ranging from diabetes to Parkinson's. 
But their use is controversial because some scientits say the most promising stem cells for treating human disease are derived from very early human embryos left over from fertility treatments.
In the report Hasenfuss and his team describe how they isolated the sperm-producing stem cells from mice testes.
The cells, which they call multipotent adult germline stem cells, under certain conditions, act like embryonic stem cells. 
When the researchers injected the cells into early embryos they found the cells contributed to the development of different organs. 
Intruiging, but more work needed
Professor Chris Higgins, the director of the UK's Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre, says the possibility of using the cells as an alternative to embryonic stem cells for therapy is intriguing.
"However, much more research is required before the similarities and differences between these testes cells and embryonic stem cells are understood, and before their potential for use in therapy can be properly assessed," he says.
Dr Stephen Minger, a stem cell biologist at Kings College London, describes the findings as "pretty amazing" but says more research is needed. 
"We would need to replicate this in humans, just because it works in a mouse doesn't necessarily mean it will also work in people," he says.

Chatting on a mobile phone before sleep affects the electrical activity of your brain
Radiation from mobile phones stimulates brain activity in the early stages of sleep even after you've finished using the phone, an Australian study shows.
Associate Professor Andrew Wood from the Brain Sciences Institute at Melbourne's Swinburne University says his study also found that exposure to electromagnetic radiation from mobile phones can reduce levels of the hormone melatonin, which is connected to the body's sleep-wake cycle.
But the study, reported in the International Journal of Radiation Biology, says it's premature to conclude that talking on your mobile phone before bed will get in the way of a good night's sleep.
Alpha waves
The study's 55 participants received 30 minutes of mobile phone radiation, or 30 minutes of 'sham' radiation, on successive Sunday nights before being tucked into bed.
Wood found that exposure to mobile phone radiation resulted in heightened alpha-wave activity in the brain. Alpha waves are associated with relaxation and daydreaming but normally disappear with sleep.
"We found that in the first hour or so after getting to sleep that there was a significant change in one of the parameters of brain activity, that is the amount of alpha waves in the brain wave patterns," he says.
The increase occurred in the first non-REM period of the night, when subjects had drifted off but before they were in deep sleep.
Australian sleep specialist Professor Leon Lack, from Flinders University in Adelaide, says this could be a sign that the first non-REM period of sleep isn't as efficient as it could be, leaving people feeling tired when they wake up.
"Alpha waves are really only present when you're lying awake with your eyes closed trying to fall asleep," he says.
"If they are occurring during what would normally be sleep stages [it could be] the intrusion of some sort of wakeful brain activity at a time when it shouldn't be there."
Melatonin 
Researchers also tested participants' urine for markers of the hormone melatonin, which is produced in the evening and is associated with individual sleeping and waking rhythms.
Wood says some participants had an increased amount of melatonin after exposure, although there was no overall increase.
"Some people had significantly less of this melatonin marker in their urine before they went to bed but overall the amount of melatonin didn't change," he says.
He says the difference was quite marked in some people, indicating there may be "a special subgroup of the population that are susceptible to the effects of mobile phone radiation".
Lack says melatonin's role in sleep is unclear and it's uncertain whether having more or less affects your sleep.
Wood says that at this stage mobile phones don't seem to influence how well you sleep, unless the phones ring at all hours or you've had a particularly exciting conversation.
"If people are finding they can't sleep after using mobile phones often it's the content of what they've been talking about that's the reason they can't sleep," he says.

Humpback whales have structured songs, with phrases and themes. But no-one knows what they mean
Humpback whales sing songs that contain elements of human language, according to a detailed new analysis of whale songs recorded in Hawaii.
While researchers do not yet believe that whales have their own language per se, they discovered striking similarities between human language and the songs of humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae). 
Lead researcher Ryuji Suzuki says that both humans and whales communicate by using discrete sound units that are arranged within a hierarchical structure. 
"For example, a text consists of paragraphs, a paragraph consists of sentences, a sentence consists of clauses etc," says Suzuki, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
"They are at different levels of hierarchy, or layers.
"In terms of humpback songs, a song session consists of songs, a song consists of themes, a theme consists of phrases, a phrase consists of units." 
Put together, all of these elements indicate that whales have something akin to their own syntax, which normally refers to the grammatical arrangement of words within sentences. 
The findings are published in this month's Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 
Suzuki and colleagues designed a computer program that converted tiny sections of whale songs into mathematical symbols. 
They then analysed the average amount of information that was conveyed for each symbol with a technique called information theory, which quantifies complexity and structure. 
"Information in the context of information theory does not include 'meaning', but it focuses on how rare, surprising, predictable or complex a message is," Suzuki explains. 
Listening to whale song
Human observers who had no previous knowledge about whale song structure grouped humpback whale recordings into complexity, redundancy and predictability. 
The computer analysis and the human observers all found that whale songs are not only hierarchical, they convey around one bit of information per second. 
By comparison, humans generate 10 bits of information, or variance, for every word that is spoken. 
Each spoken vowel or syllable, for example, contains at least a few bits of data that correspond to different sounds produced by the speaker. 
One versus 10 may not sound very impressive, but whales communicate in water, often over long distances. Water helps to transmit songs because it carries sound four times faster than air. 
Using information theory
Jennifer Miksis-Olds, a research associate at the University of Massachusetts at Dartmouth's School for Marine Science and Technology, is one of the few people in the world who is also using information theory to study whale songs. 
"I do agree with the new findings. I am currently using information theory to analyse humpback whale communication, and I have come to similar conclusions," Miksis-Olds says.
She agrees that marine mammal songs and sounds cannot be classified at present as language, but both she and Suzuki admit that they do not yet understand the meaning of whale songs and that more research is needed. 
"This is what we know [so] little about," Suzuki says. "[Humpback whale] singers are always male, and song is believed to be a mating display. The song type evolves over the mating season, and all animals in the same population seem to share the same song type, that is, humpback whales somehow copy each other's song.
"However, the details of this are unknown. What the songs mean is, again, unknown."

Combining alcohol with an energy drink makes you feel sober enough to drive even though you're over the limit, new research shows
People who combine energy drinks with alcohol can feel more sober than they truly are, a new study suggests. 
Brazilian researchers found that young men were no less impaired when they drank a mix of alcohol and a popular energy drink than when they downed a standard mixed drink. 
But drinkers seemed to think they were less drunk. 
According to research in the April issue of the journal Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research, the drinkers reported less fatigue, fewer headache symptoms and better coordination.
This is concerning because people who mistakenly think they are less impaired can be a danger to themselves and others, according to study co-author Dr Maria Lucia Souza-Formigoni. 
"I think people should be aware of this effect of the combination. They feel better but they are not 'good enough' to drive, for instance," says Souza-Formigoni, an associate professor at the Federal University of Sao Paulo.
Energy drinks typically consist of carbohydrates, B vitamins, caffeine and taurine, a derivative of an amino acid found in animal tissue. 
Some studies have shown that the beverages, or their main ingredients, may improve mood and physical performance.
And there's a popular, though unproven, belief that mixing energy drinks with alcohol can counter some of the effects of drinking. 
This new study suggests that while energy drinks may help drinkers feel less tipsy, they are still in fact drunk.
Mixing your drinks
The study included 26 young men who each took part in three separate experiments: one in which they drank vodka mixed with an energy drink, another in which they had vodka mixed with fruit juice, and a third where they drank only the energy drink. 
In general, the researchers found that the men reported fewer headache symptoms and less weakness with the energy drink-alcohol mixture compared with the standard mixed drink. They also thought their hand-eye coordination was sharper. 
But the men performed no better on objective tests of hand-eye coordination and reaction time to visual cues. 
One of the dangers of this effect, according to Souza-Formigoni and her colleagues, is that drinkers, especially young ones, may feel free to drink more than they might otherwise have. 
Depressive effects on the brain
It's not clear, Souza-Formigoni says, why study participants feel less drunk when they had the energy drink even though they were still objectively impaired.
But in animal research, she and her colleagues have found that some energy drinks ingredients, mostly caffeine and taurine, may counter some of the depressive effects alcohol has on the brain. 
The findings in humans, however, suggest that's not enough to avoid becoming drunk.

Astronomy, physics, biology, architecture and inventing. Dr Robert Hooke tried them all. Seen here, a page from his Micrographia, a study of biological specimens viewed through a microscope he made himself
A manuscript charting the birth of modern science, lost for more than 200 years, goes on sale this week.
The journal of Dr Robert Hooke has been hailed as 'science's missing link' and has a price tag equivalent to about A$2.4 million (US$1.7 million).
It contains details of experiments Hooke conducted as curator at the UK's Royal Society from 1662 and his correspondence as its secretary from 1677. 
The notes include a celebrated row between Hooke and Sir Isaac Newton over planetary motion and gravity, and the lost record confirming the first observation of microbes by Antoni van Leeuwenhoek.
Hooke was a keen observer of nature with a fascination for things mechanical but, because of ill health as a child, he was initially left largely to educate himself. 
A talented artist, he was sent to London when his father died to study under leading portrait painter Peter Lely.
He went on to study first at Westminster School and then Christ College, Oxford where he won a place as a chorister. 
There he studied astronomy, tried his hand at mechanical flight and rubbed shoulders with top scientists of the day.
A meeting of these scientists in November 1660 founded the Society for the Promoting of Physico-Mathematical Experimental Learning, which in mid-1662 received a royal charter and became the Royal Society of London.
Biologist, astronomer, physicist
In 1665 Hooke finally found fame with publication of his Micrographia containing pictures of objects he had studied through a microscope he had made himself, and a number of biological discoveries. 
Diarist Samuel Pepys said of the book that it was the most ingenious he had ever read. 
But his talents did not stop there. 
Hooke discovered that Jupiter revolved on its own axis, suggested that gravity could be measured using a pendulum.
Architect, inventor
He was also a talented architect and was chief assistant to Sir Christopher Wren in rebuilding London after the Great Fire of 1666. 
He also suggested the presence of gravitational 'vortices' pulling comets from their orbit, and invented the reflecting telescope, the sextant, the punched-paper record-keeper, the wind gauge, the worm gear and the wheel barometer.
But he fell out with Newton when he accused him of stealing from his original ideas when he produced his theory of light and colour in 1672, and Newton removed all reference to Hooke from his famed Principia.
Hooke's law
Despite Hooke's huge contribution to science and understanding, the only innovation to bear his name is Hooke's law, which says that the extension of a spring is proportional to the force applied. 
Hooke died in London in March 1703 aged 67.
Experts from an auction house found his journal by chance in a cupboard at a private house in Hampshire during a routine valuation.

Researchers have developed a working interface between living tissue and silicon chips
European researchers have 'glued' live nerve cells onto a silicon chip and managed to get the neurones and chip to talk to each other.
The technology, which used networks of rat neurones grown in culture, could lead to the creation of 'neural prostheses' or the creation of 'organic computers' powered by living neurones, the team says.
The Italian, German and Swiss team says it took a lot of effort to develop a working interface between the living cells and the chip's inorganic compounds.
"We attacked the problems using two major strategies, through the semiconductor technology and the biology," says molecular biologist Professor Stefano Vassanelli from the University of Padua.
The team, which is being funded by the European Commission's Information Society Technologies program, put 12,384 transistors and hundreds of capacitors on a 1 millimetre square chip.
Then the reserearchers used proteins found in the brain to 'glue' the neurones to the chip, Vassanelli says.
The proteins also act as a link between the ion channels of the neurones and the semiconductors, allowing neural signals to be passed to the chip.
In the opposite direction, the chip's capacitors stimulated the neurones, causing them to 'fire'.
Vassanelli says the team's next project is to work out how chips could communicate with genes and vice versa.
"Genes are where memory comes from and without them you have no memory or computation," he says.
"We want to explore a way to use genes to control the neurochip."
Keeping neurones alive
Professor Ashley Craig, an Australian neuroscientist with the University of Technology, Sydney, says linking computer circuits with brain cells can kill neurones by interfering with the brain's fragile chemical and electrical balance.
And linking chips with genes may be an option.
Commenting on the European proposal, he says targeting genes instead would enable the chip to communicate with a network of cells.
"Genes contain the memory and knowledge of building things, growth and regrowth," he says.
"They would target a particular gene, maybe heart disease or addiction, and link it to a computer chip tucked away under your skin, and try and influence [gene communication]."

Scientists have thought of using soil microbes to break down styrofoam into a useful byproduct
Bacteria that break down styrofoam into 'green' byproducts could be used to make a new kind of biodegradable plastic, new research suggests.
The method could help reduce the tonnes of petroleum-based plastic waste that makes its way into landfills each year, says Irish research leader Dr Kevin O'Connor, who heads the bioplastic research group at University College Dublin.
O'Connor and his team's research results will appear in the 1 April issue of the journal Environmental Science and Technology. 
Scientists have already used microorganisms to break down the kinds of chemical products found in styrofoam.
But no-one has created a useful plastic byproduct, says Dr Manfred Zinn, a research group leader at EMPA, the materials science and technology lab of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology. 
To convert the plastics, O'Connor's team used a strain of soil bacteria known as Pseudomonas putida. 
In nature, this microorganism lives in the ground, where it feeds on the carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen found in organic matter such as dead plants. 
Styrofoam, a material made from polystyrene, contains hydrogen and carbon, but not in a form that the bacteria can readily digest. 
To make the plastic edible, the scientists had to heat it under the process of pyrolysis, which melted the polystyrene at very high temperatures in an oxygen-free environment to break the chemical bonds. 
No oxygen means no burning and so no emissions. During the process, the polystyrene became liquid styrene, a carbon-based compound that the bacteria can eat. 
In the lab, the scientists created a growing environment for the bacteria, feeding them all their favourite foods, including nitrogen and oxygen. 
A steady flow of styrene oil supplied to the bacteria in a fermentor allowed the bacteria to proliferate. 
After the colony grew to a healthy size, the scientists stopped feeding the bacteria nitrogen. That stimulated the bacteria to begin storing the carbon for use later. 
Storing carbon is the key
It turns out that when the bacteria store the carbon, they convert it into a plastic known as polyhydroxyalkanoate, or PHA. 
PHA is made up of fatty acids that are easily attacked by the bacterial enzymes.
"PHA is a 100% biodegradable plastic that can be thrown on your compost heap. Bacteria in the compost heap use the plastic as food to grow, so there is no damage to the environment. You can't get greener than that for a plastic," says O'Connor. 
The compound can also be harvested from the bacteria to make biodegradable plastic goods such as shampoo bottles, credit cards, and medical implants and devices, all of which will fully degrade in the garbage, says O'Connor. 
"This is a great opportunity to make something better from a recycled material," says Zinn. 
O'Connor and team know that worldwide, more than 14 million tonnes of polystyrene are produced annually, but are unsure how much investment it would take to build a plant capable of converting the material into PHA. 
But he says the process works on any petrochemical plastic waste and that fact could open up new areas of exploration for the petrochemical industry.

Total solar eclipse, as seen in 2002
It has been called the Sun-eating dragon, the spirit of the dead and the eye of God. 
It has been a harbinger of great events, good and evil - famines, bumper harvests, wars, and the birth and death of kings.
Later today, we'll know it as the total eclipse of the Sun, when the Moon will be perfectly aligned with our star, and the lunar shadow will alight on the tip of eastern Brazil.
Racing eastwards across the Atlantic, the umbra will reach the coast of Ghana, then head across Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Niger, Chad, Libya, where the eclipse will be at its longest, lasting 4 minutes, 7 seconds, and then northwestern Egypt.
It will then zip across the Mediterranean, passing between Crete and Cyprus before making landfall in Turkey, traversing Georgia, southern Russia and then in Kazakhstan. 
The shadow briefly crosses Russia again before expiring at sunset in Mongolia after a marathon of 3 hours, 12 minutes and 14,500 kilometres.
Around 2500 kilometres either side of this path of totality, observers will get a partial eclipse. For instance, about a fifth of the Sun will be obscured in the UK, southern Sweden and the southern Gulf. 
Australia is among countries unable to see the eclipse. But ABC Science Online brings you photos, videos and commentary of the event as seen from Turkey.
See Chasing the Sun in Turkey for more information.
Far back in time
Eclipses are infrequent events, and their rarity is enhanced by the fact that most take place over the ocean, which covers two-thirds of the world's surface, and so they go unwitnessed except by seafarers and remote islanders.
But writings dating back to the dawn of civilisation testify to thrill and dread as the Sun, the bringer of life, was gradually blotted out, the stars appeared in an indigo sky, the terrified birds stopped singing and bats left their roost. 
"Nothing can be surprising any more, or impossible or miraculous, now that Zeus, father of the Olympians, has made night out of noonday, hiding the bright  sunlight, and ... fear has come upon mankind," wrote the Greek poet Archilochus after an eclipse in 648 BC. 
"After this, men can believe anything, expect anything. 
"Don't any of you be surprised in future if land beasts change places with dolphins and go to live in their salty pastures, and get to like the sounding waves of the sea more than the land, while the dolphins prefer the mountains." 
For the ancient Chinese, the eclipse was a Sun-eating dragon, which had to be scared away by the banging of cymbals and pans.
For the Vikings, it was caused by two chasing wolves, Skoll and Hati. Hindu mythology blames a demon called Rahu who spitefully takes a bite out of the Sun from time to time. 
Even today, in some cultures, eclipses are believed to bring poisonous vapours and so food and water containers are turned upside-down in protection. 
Watching and waiting
The most-observed solar eclipse took place in 1999, when the path of totality crossed major population centres in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. 
This year, no big city lies directly on the 185 kilometre-wide path, although several, including Ankara, Lagos and Tbilisi, lie very close to it and will get a near-total eclipse. 
The luckiest of all are people who inhabit the mountains of central Turkey, says NASA's veteran eclipse specialist, Dr Fred Espenak. 
"A quarter million people in Sivas have the opportunity of witnessing a second total eclipse from their homes in less than seven years," he says.

In clever kids, the brain's cortex or outer mantle thickens rapidly during adolescence
Intelligence may have more to do with how the brain develops during adolescence than its overall size, researchers say.
US scientists at the National Institutes of Health show that the brains of children with high IQs show a distinct pattern of development. 
The cortex, or outer mantle of the brain, starts out thinner and thickens more rapidly in very intelligent children. It peaks around 11 or 12 years old before thinning rapidly in the late teens.
"We found that the cortex showed a different pattern of development," says Dr Philip Shaw, lead author of the research published today in the journal Nature.
Youngsters with average IQs have a thicker cortex to start with and peak earlier before gradual thinning begins. 
Shaw adds that the changes are subtle and what is driving them is a mystery. Why children have a thicker or thinner cortex initially is also not known. 
"Brainy children are not cleverer solely by virtue of having more or less grey matter at any one age," says Dr Judith Rapoport, a co-author of the study. 
"Rather IQ is related to the dynamics of cortex maturation."
The scientists took magnetic resonance imaging scans of 307 healthy children and teenagers, aged 5-19, every two years as they grew up. 
They compared the scans to see how they related to the children's IQ. Very intelligent youngsters had scores of 121-145 while high IQs were between 109-120 and average between 83-108. 
The smartest youngsters showed the highest rate of change in the scans. The scientists believe the longer thickening time in the very brainy children might indicate a longer period for the development of high-level cognitive circuits in the brain. 
The researchers add that the thinning phase could involve a "use it or lose it" pruning, or killing off, of brain cells and their connections as the brain matures and becomes more efficient. 
"That might be happening more efficiently in the most intelligent children," says Shaw. "People with very agile minds tend to have a very agile cortex."

Astronomers have found mid-sized moonlets embedded in Saturn's rings. But that doesn't fit with current models of how the rings formed
Minute moons just a hundred metres or so across orbit Saturn within its rings, astronomers report, a finding that questions how the planet's majestic ring system came into being.
Researchers report their findings today in the journal Nature. 
The prevailing theory is that Saturn's rings, reflected by the distant Sun, comprise the remnants of an icy moon that long ago was smashed open by an asteroid or comet. 
But a collision of this kind normally gives rise to debris in a wide range of sizes, from big lumps a kilometre wide to pebbles a few centimetres across. 
Photographs and radar sensing by scout probes, though, have until now shown Saturn's ring particles to be remarkably small, between a few centimetres to a few metres across. 
The only big exceptions were a pair of kilometre-wide moons called Pan and Daphnis that lurk within the ring system. There seemed to be nothing in the intermediate size. 
The missing rocks
Astronomers led by Dr Matthew Tiscareno of Cornell University, New York, believe they have found some of the missing medium-sized rocks. 
Their evidence comes from data sent back by the orbiting US spacecraft Cassini, which shows gaps, shaped rather like a propeller blade or an elongated teardrop, in some of the rings. 
Tiscareno's team deduct that the gaps are caused by what they call embedded moonlets.
These are rocks about 100 metres across that were too small to be seen in the Cassini pictures but which must have briefly scattered the particles as they orbited, rather like a ship forms a bow wave and trails a wake that then closes  behind it. 
Four of the teardrop gaps have been spotted so far, and more may emerge later this year when Cassini returns to the ring system to view it from a different angle. 
The finding is the latest evidence to suggest that Saturn's seven rings, first spotted by Galileo in 1610 according to legend, are a dynamic, continuous evolving structure. 
The debris becomes clustered, gets torn apart by collision and is then reassembled by Saturn's gravitational forces and the particles' own gravitational attraction. 
Research presented last year found that the outermost A ring has many empty spaces.
And part of the innermost D ring has become dimmer and moved closer to Saturn by about 200 kilometres since it was observed by the US probe Voyager in 1980 and 1981.

Much is at stake under the new research funding plan, both for the older established universities and the new ones
A proposed plan requiring Australian universities to prove their impact on business and the community before they get government research funding has met with a mixed response.
And curiously, universities that focus on applied research are worried they could lose out under the proposed plan.
Federal science and education minister, Julie Bishop, this week released a report that recommends an overhaul of the way university research funding is allocated.
The final advice to government on the Research Quality Framework (RQF) comes after two years of deliberation.
Under the current "metrics-based" system, the government allocates block funding to universities based on a formula.
The formula values such things as success in gaining competitive grants, the number of students completing PhDs and the number of publications produced.
The new system would use expert panels to allocate funds based on a more detailed assessment of research quality, and, for the first time, an assessment of the impact of the research on "end-users of research".
Go8 response
The Group of 8 (Go8) universities, welcome the idea of measuring impact but have some concerns.
"While impact is very important and research should always be done with some outcomes in mind, we shouldn't expect that every bit of research that's being done in our universities is able to predict the sorts of outcomes [it will have]," says Go8 executive director, Virginia Walsh.
The large "sandstone" universities that make up the Go8 have the largest output of high-profile international research collaboration and publications, and receive the lion's share of research funding under the current system.
The Go8 says the new plan is modelled on a 20-year old UK system that is about to be disbanded and replaced by a metrics-based system.
"It's ironic," says Walsh, "that we are looking at the possibility of emulating something that has now been replaced by something much closer to what we've currently got."
Other universities nervous too
Outside the Go8 are newer and generally smaller universities that tend to focus more on applied research.
While you might think a system that values impact might work in their favour, such universities are nervous they could lose out under the new plan to the larger universities.
Professor Greg Baxter of the New Generation Universities group, for example, says it will depend on how research "impact" is measured and weighted against research "quality".
"I think the potential for significant disadvantage for universities like us is clearly there because you can set up the rules and the metrics to advantage the Group of 8 should it be so desired," says Baxter who is pro vice-chancellor of research at Victoria University.
Professor Andris Stelbovics, of the Innovative Research Universities Australia group of universities is also worried about the relative weight that will be given to impact and quality.
"We do pure basic research or research based purely on scholarship," says Stelbovics, who is pro vice-chancellor of research of Murdoch University. "But we also have quite a few research teams that work in applied areas."
He says he is concerned about how a university research consultancy with local government to solve waste management problems would be valued under the new system.
His group also wants funding for agricultural problems such as wheat rust disease, which is only of relevance to a small group of countries including Australia, to be valued equally in terms of impact with research of global significance.
Timetable questions
Minister Bishop has set up a new group headed by chief scientist Dr Jim Peacock to advise on the implementation of the new plan once it's finalised and accepted by the government.
But universities are concerned about the proposed timetable for implementation.
Walsh thinks it will take at least another year to work out the details of the plan, including a cost-benefit analysis.
And the universities also want to make sure they are given money to implement the new system so their researchers are researching rather than filling out audit forms.
"If they were to do it extremely well, it's probably too expensive," says Baxter. "And if they do it on the cheap it may not be any better than the system we've currently got."

Dr Jeffrey Stilwell in the background with PhD student Chris Consoli holding the theropod toe bone fossil they found on the Chatham Islands
The first proof that land-dwelling dinosaurs lived on remote islands in the South Pacific has been unveiled by an Australian-based researcher.
Dr Jeffrey Stilwell, a palaeontologist from Melbourne's Monash University, says he discovered the fossilised foot, finger and spinal bones of carnivorous dinosaurs on the Chatham Islands, about 850 kilometres east of New Zealand. 
The discovery confirms the Chathams were once connected to New Zealand by a finger-like extension, Stilwell says.
"Prior to our discoveries, only a few isolated examples of dinosaur fossils had been found in the northern part of New Zealand," he says. 
"Now we've found dinosaur remains almost 1000 kilometres east out in the middle of the South Pacific."
He adds that his team has already uncovered more dinosaur fossils in the Chathams than had been unearthed in New Zealand over the past 25 years. 
While some dinosaur remains had been found along the Antarctic peninsula and in South America, this is the first such discovery in the southwest Pacific and is possibly unique in the southern hemisphere, he says. 
"[The dinosaurs] were on their own evolutionary path for probably 15 million years since the separation of the Chathams-New Zealand region some 85-80 million years ago," he says. 
Stilwell found the first fossils by accident when he visited the Chatham Islands in 2003. 
"No one had even hypothesised that there were any fossils out that far," he says. 
With a grant from the National Geographic Society, Stilwell and associates returned to the archipelago to continue their research, the first findings of which were published in the journal Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology. 
But he says a subsequent trip to the islands in February yielded a "huge collection" of new fossils, which are still being analysed. 
"The story's going to get better," he says.

New guidelines recommend 30 chest compressions to every two breaths to improve blood flow to the heart and brain
New advice on how best to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) suggests doubling the number of chest compressions, Australian emergency medicine experts say.
This should mean more sustained blood flow, especially to the heart and brain.
The move, which was announced recently by the Australian Resuscitation Council, is now in line with international consensus and best evidence, say the experts.
The new protocol recommends 30 chest compressions to every two breaths when resuscitating infants, children or adults.
The pattern of two ventilations then 30 compressions should continue, to achieve a rate of 100 compressions a minute, says council chair and University of Western Australia lecturer in emergency medicine, Associate Professor Ian Jacobs.
He hopes the one conversion rate for all basic life support rescue attempts and patients would be easier to remember and increase the likelihood people will at least try CPR. 
The new protocol also recommends compressions be delivered faster and harder, people should visualise the centre of the chest and compress there, interruptions should be minimised, a defibrillator attached urgently, other ventilation avoided and says any attempt at resuscitation is better than no attempt.
Kelli Mitchener from the Australian College of Critical Care Nurses and a nurse at Melbourne's Austin Hospital, says the new ratio means better blood flow.
"By increasing the number of compressions it means there will be fewer pauses where blood circulation is not occurring, hopefully improving the patient's outcome," she says.
The changes are based on a review of published evidence which found giving more compressions may help save more lives and a consensus developed by the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation published in the journals Resuscitation and Circulation.
"There are 30,000-35,000 cardiac arrests annually in Australia - due to a heart attack, drowning or drug overdose for example - but less than half receive CPR before an ambulance arrives and most [who don't] will die," says Jacobs.
The guidelines, which are available online, are for the public but include sections for doctors, hospitals and ambulance officers.
St John Ambulance begins teaching the new techniques in its first aid classes from April.

A new lubricant that forms polymers to protect engine wear also saves oil, according to new research
A new smart lubricant that forms a protective film when it meets two surfaces rubbing together means engines need less oil, a chemical conference has heard this week.
Using about 4.5 grams of the lubricant saves more than 450 grams of oil, according to a presentation at the American Chemical Society's meeting this week in Atlanta.
While its inventors do not believe the lubricant can replace standard motor oil in vehicles, they say it may someday replace the oil used to test engines and mechanical systems. 
Additives developed from the same technology could also stave off wear, improve engine performance and reduce pollutants, its developers say.
The technology behind the new compounds is called tribopolymerisation. 
"By tribopolymerisation, we mean the use of small molecules in a fluid, such as an oil, to reduce wear and damage of the sliding surfaces by forming thin polymer films, which offer protection," says US researcher Professor Michael Furey, from Virginia Tech, who developed the process with Czeslaw Kajdas and colleagues at the Radom Technical University in Poland. 
"It is a process of molecular design. We do not add any polymers to the system, nor do we coat surfaces with polymers. Instead, our monomers are designed to form thin polymer films directly on the rubbing surfaces continuously and only where needed," Furey says. 
The international team of scientists has been working on the project since 1981, but recent developments include a precise way of measuring what happens as the films form; the discovery of new classes of compounds, such as the engine lubricant; and agreements with three organisations who hope to further develop and market the technology. 
Furey says that 16 engines recently were treated with about 4.5 grams of the smart composition. 
"All passed the run-in tests successfully with no signs of damage," he says. "In a subsequent series of tests in a different factory location, 24 engines were pre-treated the same way. All 24 engines were in perfect condition after the run-in tests. The results were quite amazing." 
Smelly fumes
He and his colleagues also say the technology could reduce the "emission of smelly fumes" from the use of diesel in trucks, cars, buses and equipment. 
Currently, many countries, such as Sweden, and US states, like California, have imposed limits on the sulfur content of diesel fuels, since sulfur oxide is one of the stinkiest pollutants. 
The catch is that the substitute low-sulfur fuels increase wear and tear on the fuel injector and fuel pump, according to the researchers, who say they have invented diesel fuel "lubricity additives" that work with low-sulfur fuels to reduce their damage on the engine. 
Dr Jorn Larsen-Basse, former director of the Surface Engineering and Tribology Program at the US National Science Foundation, says the technology is "innovative". 
"It works well with metal surfaces, especially steel, because molecules stick onto it easily. The engine pretreatment application might very well be possible," Larsen-Basse says.
The inventors hope to conduct further studies on how high surface temperatures and other engine factors affect the performance of the new compounds.

Power poles damaged by Cyclone Larry, which hit northern Australia last month. But cyclones can be a lot worse, says one expert
Cyclones like Larry are not as intense as we think, says a cyclone risk engineer.
And if we don't get our forecasts right, he says Australia could be left unprepared for the worst.
Dr Bruce Harper, a Queensland-based consultant who has a long association with the Bureau of Meteorology, says Cyclone Larry, which hit the northern town of Innisfail recently, was not as powerful as people think.
He says while the bureau predicted the cyclone would hit land as a category 5 cyclone, with winds of around 290 kilometres per hour, the closest weather stations showed it was a lot weaker.
Harper says a station at South Johnstone, 7 kilometres from Innisfail, showed wind speeds of 180 kilometres per hour.
And the maximum speeds recorded at the nearest offshore station were at Flinders Reef, which measured 240 kilometres per hour.
Both these measurements fall within the definition of a category 4 cyclone.
"My estimation is that it was a low category 4," says Harper, who also advises local and state governments on cyclone risk and insurers on estimated losses from cyclones.
"It wasn't 290 kilometres [per hour] and if it was there would be barely a house standing in parts of Innisfail," he says.
"The community needs to know that cyclones can be a lot worse than this."
Inaccuracy not significant
Gary Foley of the Bureau of Meteorology in Melbourne acknowledges the cyclone was weaker than predicted.
But, he says when all the data is in, the actual wind speed will probably be calculated to be just 40 or 50 kilometres per hour less than what was predicted.
"So how does that translate to a person making a response before the storm hits. Do you put in a couple more nails in the roof or something?"
While Harper acknowledges the bureau helped people prepare for a severe cyclone and is keen to emphasise the agency does the best with the technology and resources it has, he says a difference of 50 kilometres per hour could have a huge impact on damage.
And he also thinks that even after final estimates are made the bureau will still be overestimating the strength of Larry and he says such overestimates present broader problems.
Higher and lower estimates
Harper says most predictions of cyclone intensities can't be accurately verified because there aren't enough weather stations collecting data on how strong the winds really are when they hit land.
But, he says, cyclone risk engineers like himself use the closest weather station measurements, along with the actual damage caused by cyclones, to make their own estimates of the strengths of cyclones once they hit land.
This information is used to build models that help develop building authorities to specify standards for cyclone-proof houses.
And the models help insurance companies work out how much money they need to keep aside for cyclone damage payouts.
Harper says estimates by cyclone risk engineers are almost always lower than those provided by meteorological predictions.
And he is concerned that the more widely publicised overestimates from the bureau might lead to public complacency.
It could give people a false impression of cyclone impacts and downplay the importance of building cyclone-resistant buildings, he says.
Uncertainties
Harper says one of the reasons why the bureau is overestimating the strength of cyclones is because there are huge uncertainties in their measurements.
He says the satellite technology they use to measure cloud temperature as a proxy for wind speed is out-dated.
It doesn't take into consideration the fact that cyclones can change rapidly or the fact that the size of a cyclone can affect its intensity, he says.
Harper says the bureau should have more radar to measure actual wind speed, and possibly fly aircraft through cyclones to collect data, as occurs in the US.
And there should be many more weather stations around the country so predictions can be more easily verified and models adjusted accordingly.
The bureau's Foley agrees that, given the funds, better technology and more weather stations would give more accurate predictions but doubts it would be worth the cost.
He appreciates engineers like Harper would like more weather stations but says the bureau can't be expected to be all things to all people and given the uncertainty that exists they would rather err on the side of caution.

The chemical composition of the Sun appears very different to what we assumed, analysis of Moon soil has revealed
Analysis of the first sample of lunar soil collected by Neil Armstrong has thrown into disarray what researchers believe about the Sun, an international team of scientists says.
Dr Trevor Ireland from the Australian National University and colleagues report in the journal Nature today the results of a study of oxygen isotopes on the surface of soil grains returned to Earth by the 1969 Apollo 11 mission.
It was hoped the study would provide clues about the chemical make-up of the Sun and the proto-planetary soup that gave birth to our solar system.
In particular, researchers hoped to find evidence for either of the two reigning theories about the Sun's composition.
According to one theory, the Sun has a similar oxygen composition to the planets.
The other theory suggests it has enriched levels of the isotope oxygen-16.
Instead, the study indicates that while the Sun is dissimilar to bodies like the Earth and meteorites, it has lower levels of oxygen-16 than expected.
"This was a completely unexpected result for us," Ireland says. "Our Sun is not the Sun that we thought it was."
The finding also suggests the Sun somehow ended up with a different composition from the cloud of dust and gas that preceded it, Ireland says.
He says this is based on other small rocky bodies, known as carbonate chondrites, which are the oldest known things in the solar system and have up to 500 times more oxygen-16 than other oxygen isotopes.
Solar winds
Ireland says while we can't get samples directly from the Sun, we can infer its composition by looking at lunar samples, which are believed to reflect its composition.
This is because lunar soil contains oxygen isotopes "implanted" by solar winds carrying elements blown out from the Sun.
But after using a caesium beam to erode the surface of the soil grains and measure the isotopes oxygen-16, oxygen-17 and oxygen-18, the researchers discovered unexpectedly low levels of oxygen-16.
"We found that the oxygen ... did not agree with either a planetary composition or the oxygen-16 rich composition," Ireland says.
"The oxygen isotopes are telling us that the mix of components in the Sun is different to that in the planets, particularly in regard to the amount of dust versus gas that comprises the Sun versus the planets."
Ireland says an analysis of oxygen from Jupiter's atmosphere, comets and other bodies in the solar system could shed more light on the mystery.

Vietnam's fight against bird flu
Humans infected with bird flu appear to have more of the virus in their throat and nose than people with standard human influenza strains, a conference is due to hear today.
The findings may help explain why avian influenza A (H5N1) has such a high death rate in humans, more than 50% mortality.
Dr Menno de Jong, head of the virology department at the University of Oxford's clinical research unit at the Hospital for Tropical Diseases in Ho Chi Minh City, studied 17 patients with bird flu.
He found the virus is often associated with disseminated infection in blood and faeces, and with higher levels of viral replication in the nasopharynx compared with contemporary Vietnamese influenza cases.
High viral levels, disseminated infection and an intense inflammatory response also seem associated with poor outcomes, he is due to tell the Australasian Society for Infectious Diseases annual scientific meeting in Wellington, New Zealand today. 
"Our main findings are that influenza H5N1 seems to be characterised by high virus levels in the respiratory tract, evidence suggesting disseminated infection [virus detection in blood and rectum] and [likely as a result of this] an intense inflammatory response," de Jong says.
High levels of viral replication are likely to play a role in determining a patient's outcome by direct effects of the virus or by the inflammatory response to the virus, he says.
"The reason for the high mortality probably is not high replication rates per se, but high replication rates of an extremely virulent virus," he says.
Antiviral drugs should be started early to prevent as much inflammatory response as possible, he says.
Two of the people in his study developed resistance to the antiviral drug oseltamivir and died, as reported in the New England Journal of Medicine last December.
Resistance implies suboptimal suppression of replication and strategies to minimise it include ensuring adequate levels of the drug in the body by increasing the dose or giving it intravenously, or combining it with other antiviral drugs, he says.
De Jong says avian-type cell receptors being mostly in the lower respiratory tract could explain why bird flu does not spread among humans, as reported in the journal Nature recently.
This may explain why viral load seems higher in the throat than nose, and why all infected developed pneumonia, he says.

Cockroaches make decisions as a group, new research shows
Cockroaches govern themselves in a very simple democracy where each insect has equal standing and group consultations precede decisions that affect the entire group, indicates a new study. 
The research determines that cockroach decision-making follows a predictable pattern that could explain group dynamics of other insects and animals, such as ants, spiders, fish and even cows. 
Cockroaches are silent creatures, save perhaps for the sound of them scurrying over a countertop. They must therefore communicate without vocalising. 
"Cockroaches use chemical and tactile communication with each other," says Dr Jos&eacute; Halloy, who co-authored the research in the current Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
"They can also use vision," says Halloy, a scientist in the Department of Social Ecology at the Free University of Brussels in Belgium.
"When they encounter each other they recognise if they belong to the same colony thanks to their antennae that are 'nooses', that is, sophisticated olfactory organs that are very sensitive," he says.
Give me shelter
Halloy tested cockroach group behaviour by placing the insects in a dish that contained three shelters. The test was to see how the cockroaches would divide themselves into the shelters. 
After much "consultation", through antenna probing, touching and more, the cockroaches divided themselves up perfectly.
For example, if 50 insects were placed in a dish with three shelters, each with a capacity for 40 bugs, 25 roaches huddled together in the first shelter, 25 gathered in the second shelter, and the third was left vacant. 
When the researchers altered this set-up so that it had three shelters with a capacity for more than 50 insects, all the cockroaches moved into the first "house". 
A delicate balance
Halloy and his colleagues found that a balance existed between cooperation and competition for resources. 
"Cockroaches are gregarious insects [that] benefit from living in groups. It increases their reproductive opportunities, [promotes] sharing of resources like shelter or food, prevents desiccation by aggregating more in dry environments, etc," he says.
"So what we show is that these behavioural models allow them to optimise group size."
The models are so predictable that they could explain other insect and animal group behaviours, such as how some fish and bugs divide themselves up so neatly into subgroups, and how certain herding animals make simple decisions that do not involve leadership. 
Important research
Dr David Sumpter, a University of Oxford zoologist, says the new study "is an excellent paper" and "important". 
"It looks both at the mechanisms underlying decision-making by animals and how those mechanisms produce a distribution of animals amongst resource sites that optimises their individual fitness," he says.
"Much previous research has concentrated on either mechanisms or optimality at the expense of the other." 
For cockroaches, it seems, cooperation comes naturally.

Professor Frederick Short retrieving marked plants from Australia's Great Barrier Reef
Seagrasses around the world are in decline, according to a global study that says human impact is largely to blame.
But Australia's 'underwater forests' in Queensland have bucked the trend and are generally in good shape, the researchers find.
Seagrass beds are shallow water ecosystems, like a forest on the ocean floor.
Not only do they serve as protective nurseries for juvenile fish and shellfish, and a habitat and feeding ground for many marine species, they protect the coastline from currents and weather-related erosion. 
Since 2001, the University of New Hampshire's Professor Frederick Short and colleagues have been running the global monitoring program SeagrassNet.
This has involved monitoring seagrass health at 45 sites in 17 countries worldwide, including Australia.
In general, the researchers found a decline in seagrass around the world.
While they have not ruled out globate climate change as a factor, they believe human impact is mainly to blame.
For example, at a state park in Malaysia researchers discovered that seagrass decline was due to on-shore logging.
This had increased the level of water-borne sediments, thus decreasing light reaching the bottom where seagrasses grow. 
When seagrass beds disappear, the impact is major. For example, a disease outbreak in the 1930s wiped out 90% of eelgrass in the North Atlantic.
As a result, the scallop fishery in the mid-Atlantic disappeared and never really recovered.
The scientists are also monitoring seagrass beds in Thailand, home to shellfish, to see the effects of the 2004 tsunami.
Healthy pockets
Rob Coles, principal scientist with Queensland's Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries, based at the Northern Fisheries Centre, Cairns, led the Australian arm of the research.
He says the good news is that seagrass beds off Green Island, 25 kilometres east of Cairns, are very healthy.
And so are seagrasses he and his colleague monitor in 50 sites across Queensland as part of the Seagrass Watch initiative.
He puts that down to low population density, good light, clean water and comprehensive water management and conservation programs.
"In fact, there is no real loss of seagrass in the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area that we really know about. There have been temporary losses due to storm damage and we've had a big loss in Hervey Bay due to cyclone damage, [and declines in some areas of the Whitsundays], but generally [it's good]," he says.
"But that's not to say there is no cause for concern because increasingly people are moving to the coast and that will eventually impact on shallow water seagrasses. So we must [remain vigilant]."

All writing systems contain key shapes like T and X that are based on nature, researchers say
When you pick up a pen and write you're not simply scratching down a set of abstract marks, but representing the trees, mountains and horizons that surrounded your forebears, according to new research.
The research, which will be published in next month's issue of The American Naturalist, looked at more than 100 writing systems throughout history.
It concludes that all letters, and symbols like trademarks, share universal shapes and forms based on patterns found in nature.
"These classes of human visual signs ... possess a similar signature in their configuration ... suggesting that there are underlying principles governing the shapes of human visual signs," the team from the California Institute of Technology writes.
The researchers say their work provides evidence that we select our visual signs to match the contours of natural scenes.
This is because we have evolved to be good at visually processing these forms, the researchers say, and the shapes we use in writing are chosen for visual recognition at the cost of manual efficiency.
In other words, we use the letters we do because they are easy to read, although they mightn't be the most efficient shapes to write.
This is in contrast to shorthand, where forms are selected for speed and efficiency of writing at the cost of speedy reading.
L, T or X
Dr Mia Stephens from the University of South Australia, a lecturer in linguistics, text, language and society, says the researchers reduced written languages to a set of basic shapes, including T, L and X.
"They've organised and categorised all the different shapes and looked at the frequency and distribution of the shapes and there's a pattern," she says.
"[They say] you can detect similarities of human writing systems and [the shapes are] topographical, so you can stretch them, and squeeze them and muck around with them but they've still got basically the same number of links and junctions," she says.
The researchers also provide three sets of natural scenes from tribal, rural and urban surroundings to show how these forms are present in our surroundings.
But Stephens says the premise of the article is too simplistic.
She questions the primary evolutionary impulse of looking at scenery and imagines what our forebears would have thought at the time.
"We have to eat, we have to run away from predators, and we've evolved to do those things, not just look at scenery as scenery."
Stephens also says the nature of written language is likely to change in future, leaving the theory obsolete.
"This argument is about the past, and the future of writing is going to be completely different because we've now got keyboards," she says.

Researchers have grown artificial bladders from patients' own cells that seem to work when transplanted into the body. But no-one knows how safe the procedure is in the long term, says one commentator
Custom-made bladders grown from patients' own cells have been successfully transplanted and work, in some cases for years, scientists report. 
Writing in The Lancet journal, they describe the cases of seven patients who had new bladders engineered from a plug of tissue grown from their own dysfunctional bladders. 
"We have shown that regenerative medicine techniques can be used to generate functional bladders that are durable," says Dr Anthony Atala of Wake Forest University in North Carolina, who led the research. 
"This suggests that regenerative medicine may one day be a solution to the shortage of donor organs ... for those needing transplants." 
Patients given transplants of bladders made from their own cells would not need to take drugs to prevent organ rejection, as do patients given transplants from either living or dead donors. 
Atala's team worked with immature cells known as progenitor cells from the patients' bladders.
The researchers have been working for 16 years to find ways to first identify and separate these cells, then to coax them into growing on a scaffold into the two main cell types found in bladders. 
The patients were children and teens aged 4 to 19 who had poor bladder function because of a congenital birth defect that causes incomplete closure of the spine. 
Their bladders are too stiff and can cause pressure on the kidneys that eventually damages them. Such patients often get bladders reconstructed from the intestines, but the procedure is imperfect. 
Atala, a urinary surgeon and an expert in regenerative and stem cell science, wanted to try to grow replacement bladders for the patients. 
Measuring for a match
"We do a three-dimensional CT scan, a computerised imaging analysis, and we figure out what the bladder shape should look like," Atala says.
"We then take a small biopsy of their bladder, about half the size of a postage stamp." 
The researchers then separate the muscle cells on the outside of the bladder, and the specialised cells that line the bag-like organ. 
Then they create an artificial scaffold on which to layer the cells. The cells are grown in special compounds that nurture the progenitor cells and allow unwanted cells to die out. 
The resulting cells are then layered onto the scaffold and incubated until they grow and spread. 
"It is very much like baking a layer cake," Atala says. "You are placing these cells on one layer at a time." 
Atala works with stem cells, the body's master cells, but in this case, his team made use of progenitor cells, which are slightly further along the pathway from a 'blank slate' master cell. 
Organ factory
His team is also working to create blood vessels, kidneys, pancreases, hearts, livers and nerves. 
The technology has been licensed from Atala's former employer, the Children's Hospital in Boston, to a new company called Tengion created to take advantage of Atala's work. 
The new bladder technology has not yet been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for widespread use.
In a commentary, Dr Steve Chung, from the Advanced Urology Institute of Illinois, describes the work as a "milestone" that could especially help people  with cancer of the bladder, which is overwhelmingly caused by smoking. 
But he recommends putting the celebrations on hold until the technique has been tested by other teams, and over longer periods, to see whether it is safe as well as effective.

Are your hormone levels going up?
Just anticipating a good laugh is enough to increase the level of feelgood hormones in your blood, a conference has heard.
Previous work has shown that laughter triggers a cascade of beneficial physiological changes.
But researchers presenting a new study at the Experimental Biology 2006 conference in the US recently say they've now shown that merely anticipating "mirthful laughter" before watching a funny video has significant neuroendocrine effects. 
Professor Lee Berk of Loma Linda University in California says people who were just about to watch their favourite funny video had 27% more beta endorphins and 87% more human growth hormone (HGH) than those who were told they'd be reading magazines for an hour.
"We believe that results suggest that the anticipation of a ... laughter ... event initiates changes in neuroendocrine response prior to the onset of the event itself," he says.
Beta endorphins provide natural pain relief and low levels are associated with depression.
HGH is involved in growth, development and cell maintenance and some research suggests it plays a role in maintaining a healthy immune system.
Gags or mags?
Berk describes these effects as "the biology of hope", and says they are linked to the anticipation of a positive mood state.
In the study 16 people where asked to choose their favourite funny video. 
They were told three days before the experiment whether they would get to watch their video or sit in a "neutral room" and thumb through a pile of magazines.
Their blood hormone levels were tested just before the video was turned on, four times during an hour of video watching or magazine reading and three times afterwards.
Berk says the hormone levels stayed high throughout the video and afterwards.
Anticipation can be powerful
Professor Nicholas Keks of Monash University, an Australian researcher whose expertise includes hormones in psychiatry, says anticipation is a powerful emotion in terms of triggering physiological and emotional responses.
"Anticipation is a huge issue in areas that affect our psychology, whether it be anticipation of pleasurable activities or a bit of pain," he says.
"You just have to look at the classic example of salivation before food, or expectation of sexual activity ... I think laughter belongs in that group."
He says the physiological changes shown in the study are probably linked to the so-called "flight or fight" response of nervous system arousal.
"Part of laughter is a general arousal and what that will do is stimulate various hormonal and autonomic systems which go along with arousal," he says.
Berk says he next wants to study cytokine and inflammatory immune responses to the anticipation of laughter.

Astronomers found the methanol cloud in the W3(OH) region of the Milky Way, where stars form
Astronomers say they have spotted a cloud of alcohol in space that measures 463 billion kilometres across, a finding that could shed light on how giant stars are formed from primordial gas.
The vast bridge-shaped cloud of methanol has been spotted in a region of the Milky Way called W3(OH), where stars form by the gravitational collapse of concentrations of gas and dust. 
Researchers led by Dr Lisa Harvey-Smith spotted the cloud from the UK's Jodrell Bank Observatory.
They present their findings today at a meeting of the UK's Royal Astronomical Society in Leicester. 
The researchers have revealed giant filaments of gas by detecting masers.
These are like lasers. But rather than emitting beams of light, masers emit beams of microwave radiation, which the molecules in the gas cloud amplify millions of times.
The largest of the maser filaments, which were detected using the Merlin radio telescope, was 463 billion kilometres long.
The researchers say the entire gas cloud seems to be rotating as a disc around a central star, just like accretion discs in which planets form around young stars.
Harvey-Smith says the discovery is surprising as until now researchers had thought of masers as point-like objects or very small bright hotspots surrounded by fainter halos.
In 2004, astronomers spotted methanol for the first time in one of the disc-like clusters that form around nascent stars. 
That discovery opened up a new area of debate in astrophysics, challenging the conventional view that interstellar chemistry could not provide the conditions for creating complex molecules.
Until then researchers thought the molecules would be ripped apart by ultraviolet radiation from stars and other tough conditions. 
Around 130 organic molecules have also been identified so far in space, fuelling speculation that these complex molecules may have helped to sow the seeds for life on the fledgling Earth.

The 2004 Boxing Day tsunami destroyed the forest that once grew along this Indian coastline
Mangroves and coastal forests offer little or no protection against tsunamis, says new research that debunks earlier findings.
Last year researchers studied 17 coastal villages in the Tamil Nadu region of India in the months after the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami.
They concluded that death rates were lower in villages fronted by mangroves.
But when researchers including those from the Australian Research Council's Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies analysed the data they found a very different story.
"The most important determinants of the number of people that died [in the Tamil Nadu region] were the distance of the village from the coast and its height above sea level," says co-author and Australian marine ecologist Dr Andrew Baird.
"In effect, there was no protective function of these coastal forests."
Baird says while the hypothesis of the original research was reasonable, it was not borne out by their findings, published in the April issue of the journal Estuarine and Coastal Shelf Science.
Their analysis revealed that the distance of a village from the coast and the height of the village above sea level explained 87% of the variation in mortality among villages.
Once these two variables were taken into account, vegetation area seemed to account for less than 1% of the variation.
"Mangroves and intact coastal ecosystems are wonderful and necessary things ... but they won't protect you from tsunamis," Baird says.
"We're concerned that by telling people that mangroves and coastal forest will protect them from a tsunami will give [people] a false sense of security.
"When the next wave comes people may be misled into thinking that they are safe because their village is fronted by a mangrove forest.
"The other concern is that the concept of 'green belts' and buffer zones is being used as an excuse by the tourism industry and other interests such as plantation owners to move people away from their homes and livelihoods and take this land from them."
Baird says people would be better to concentrate on early-warning systems and effective evaluation strategies in the event of another tsunami.
"That's the way you're going to save lives," he says.
Researchers from the University of Guam and the Wildlife Conservation Society-Indonesia Program were also involved in the new analysis.

Will the Venus Express mission yield new insights into what awaits Earth?
A space probe that arrives at Venus today will yield new insights into what caused the runaway greenhouse effect there and could bring a salutary warning for our own planet, scientists say.
The European Space Agency's Venus Express will spend three years peering through a shroud of toxic sulfur clouds to glean information about the climate, atmosphere and curious 'backwards' rotation of the so-called pressure cooker planet.
It's also hoped the mission will help answer questions about what caused its mysterious 'resurfacing' some 500 million years ago and whether it is being shaken by seismic activity and volcanoes.
It may also provide clues about whether the Earth and Venus were once similar, and when and why they took such radically different paths, says Dr Frank Mills of the Australian National University, an expert in the chemistry of the Venusian atmosphere who has been working with scientists directly involved in the mission.
"There are many uncertainties in trying to reconstruct Venus' evolution," he says.
"Some of these may be resolvable by making appropriate observations."
The greenhouse effect
The UK's Royal Astronomical Society says "any astronaut unlucky enough to land [on Venus] would be simultaneously crushed, roasted, choked and dissolved".
Venus' atmosphere is 90 times denser than Earth's and 96% is made up of the greenhouse gas CO2.
Scientists say this causes a strong warming effect and heats the surface of the planet to around 500&deg;C.
There are no signs of water on Venus and its surface is apparently more arid that the driest desert on Earth.
Associate director of the Australian Centre for Astrobiology at Macquarie University Dr Jeremy Bailey says isotope ratios in the atmosphere suggest that Venus once had oceans that have since evaporated.
Dr John Lattanzio, from Australia's Centre for Stellar and Planetary Astrophysics at Monash University, says that unlike Earth, Venus lacks a CO2 cycle.
On Earth, this cycle means the CO2 gets locked into water and rock and comes back out through volcanic activity, he says.
"So at any given time [on Earth] there's a lot of CO2 that's out of the atmosphere ... and it self-regulates," he says.
"Venus doesn't have a CO2 cycle because there aren't any oceans."
Mills says the probe may also help explain whether the CO2 on Venus is produced by a catalytic reaction.
He says the probe will also shed more light on the general processes by which atmospheric "greenhouses" work.
"Venus' atmospheric greenhouse has both similarities to and differences from Earth's," he says, and data from this mission will allow scientists to compare the two.
A mirror to our own future?
Bailey says learning more about Venus will help us understand where our own planet is headed.
But he doesn't believe "anything like Venus will result from the amount of CO2 we're currently putting into the atmosphere".
Rather, the Earth may end up like Venus over billions of years because of the increasing brightness of the Sun.
"In about a million years it will have increased by about 10% and it's estimated that will be enough to trigger the sorts of changes that have happened in Venus," he says.
Mills says that Venus teaches us not to take for granted that the climate on Earth will always be benign and support life.
"Research on how Venus may have evolved, what its carbon cycle is like and how volcanic activity may influence climate helps in understanding what is possible for a planet," he says.
NASA's Deep Space Network, including the Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex, has been tracking Venus Express.
Venus Express is due to end its 400 million kilometre, five month journey around 5.30 pm AEST (07:30 UTC) today.
