Ryder says Burrows and team could have found the "missing link" in understanding what makes stars explode.
"It seems that we haven't properly allowed for these sound phenomena in the core of the star when it collapses," he says.
"This might be like the death knell or the last alarm bell that something bad is about to happen."

Disabling a memory molecule in the brain lifts depression in mice as effectively as using antidepressants, researchers say
New fossils found in Australia tell us that enormous snakes evolved from predatory lizards like goannas, scientists say.
Palaeontologist Dr John Scanlon describes the well-preserved 25 to 20 million-year old snake skulls from the Riversleigh World Heritage site, in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"There's been quite a bit of controversy about what sort of lizards snakes evolved from," says Scanlon, of the Riversleigh Fossils Centre in Mount Isa.
He says one idea is that snakes evolved from small burrowing insect-eating lizards that lost their legs and developed an elongated body. 
Another idea is that snakes evolved from relatively large predatory lizards such as goannas.
Scanlon says he hopes the skulls, from a now extinct snake known as Yurlunggur, will settle the debate on the evolution of snakes.
The structure of the jaws and face prove that Yurlunggur, an Arnhem Land Aboriginal term for 'rainbow serpent', is a very primitive snake, says Scanlon.
"It has so many features in common with lizards rather than other modern snakes."
For example, Yurlunggur has a clear jugal bone, similar to a cheekbone, not present in modern snakes.
And, in particular, the skulls show the snake is more closely related to large predatory lizards than to smaller insectivorous ones, says Scanlon.
"It basically shows a relationship between the most primitive snakes and the varanoid lizards such as goannas and mosasaurs," he says, referring to the giant acquatic goannas that lived during the Cretaceous period.

The galaxy cluster Abell 2029 is composed of thousands of galaxies, shown in this xray image, and an amount of dark matter equivalent to more than a hundred trillion Suns
Dark matter particles are zooming around the universe a million times faster than anyone predicted, UK astronomers say.
They've calculated that this mysterious substance, which governs how stars and galaxies move, is moving at a speedy 9 kilometres per second.
The University of Cambridge researchers have also worked out how dark matter likes to clump together and surprising details of how hot it is, data essential in modelling how galaxies form.
A preliminary report is available on arXiv, the online website operated by Cornell University. 
Dark matter is mysterious because it doesn't emit radiation, making it difficult to spot. Indeed, no-one has detected it and not all scientists are convinced it exists.
"The best evidence for dark matter is that there are stars in our sky," says Professor Gilmore, director of the Institute of Astronomy at Cambridge, which made the latest calculations.
"Without it they'd be flying off into space."
Dark matter is the mass needed to hold stars in their given places as they move around galaxies; the faster they move the more mass is needed.
"Kepler and Newton were able to weigh the Sun just by knowing where Earth was and how fast it was moving," says Gilmore. 
"We did the same thing, only in three dimensions, finding the 'weight' of dark matter by measuring the place and speed of a very large number stars in several dwarf galaxies orbiting the Milky Way."
Hanging out in clumps
The results were surprising. Aside from their speed, the researchers calculated the smallest clump of dark matter that could exist, 1000 light-years across.
These results imply that dark matter is hotter than predicted, meaning that what astronomers call 'cold' dark matter may not be so cold after all.
At 10,000&deg;C it's still cool by astronomical standards. But it's warm enough to solve two problems that have plagued standard models of how galaxies form: that there are too few dwarf galaxies and why dark matter has not concentrated in the centre of galaxies.
Gilmore says he was initially wary of the results, which together seemed too simple to be plausible.
The discovery of a super-dim galaxy by Dr Beth Willman from New York University, gave the team an opportunity to successfully test its predictions.

Friendship may be just as important to some primates as it is for humans, new research suggests
Female baboons that suffer the loss of a close friend or relative turn to other baboons for comfort and support, according to a new study.
The study encompasses 14 years of observing over 80 free-ranging baboons in Botswana's Okavango Delta.
It provides the first direct evidence that certain animals mourn the loss of individuals, even when the rest of their social group remains intact.
The findings also suggest that friendship may be just as important to some primates as it is for humans. 
Researchers were particularly struck by the behaviour of one female chacma baboon (Papio hamadryas ursinus) named Sylvia.
She was described as "the queen of mean" and disdainful of other baboons until she lost her daughter, Sierra, to a lion kill. 
"In the week after Sierra died, Sylvia was withdrawn," says Dr Anne Engh, who led the project.
"When the other females were grooming and socialising, she tended to sit alone and rarely interacted even with her other relatives." 
Engh, a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Biology at the University of Pennsylvania, adds:
"After a week or two of moping around, Sylvia suddenly initiated grooming with several low-ranking females. I think that they were as surprised as I was; they seemed awfully nervous at first. Eventually, Sylvia settled into close relationships with a very low-ranking female and with Sierra's daughter, Margaret." 
Relieving stress
Engh says that grooming is a friendly behaviour similar to two human friends chatting over a drink.
The activity seems to relax the participants to the point where it can lower stress hormone levels. Those levels rise in humans and baboons after a close friend or relative dies. 
The researchers measured a group of such hormones, called glucocorticoids, in Sylvia and 20 other females. Baboons that experienced losses had elevated levels of the hormones after the deaths. 
In humans, this is associated with bereavement, so it is likely that baboons also grieve their dead. 
The mourning animals then widened their social circles by approaching and grooming other females, even those that were beneath them in rank.
This appeared to help them cope with losses, since stress hormone levels significantly dropped afterwards.
The discovery, outlined in a recent Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences paper, underscores the importance of friendship.
"Humans and baboons who are more socially integrated have lower glucocorticoid levels," says Engh.
"Both the human research and our results highlight the importance of friendly social relationships in reducing stress.
"Female [baboons] usually have one or two close female friends that usually devote a large proportion of their grooming to each other, and they seem to enjoy spending time close together."
Engh also mentions that friendships form between male and female baboons. For those relationships, the female often grooms the male, while the male protects the female, and any infants that she might have, from predation and bullying baboons. 
No surprise there
Brian Craft, lead keeper at the Oakland Zooin California, says that he was not surprised by the findings. 
"Advanced relationships are seen in chimpanzees, bonobos, as well as baboons and other multi-social troops," Craft explains.
"Friendships, which may help to ease stress after deaths, can be beneficial to the troop as a whole, as they keep it cohesive. It also appears that friend selection among baboons and other primates is somewhat of a choice, as for humans, and is not just instinctive behaviour."

Simulation of small satellite galaxies orbiting and falling into a larger one 
Astronomers have released new evidence to show that a region of stars in our galaxy known as the Arcturus stream is the digested remains of what was once a neighbouring galaxy.
The evidence is among the first to come from the largest star study to date, with data from 25,000 stars just released at a US astrophysics workshop.
Dr Quentin Parker of Sydney's Macquarie University and the Anglo-Australian Observatory is head of data management at the international Radial Velocity Experiment, or RAVE, which uses Australia's UK Schmidt telescope.
Parker says the latest results provide a smoking gun for the argument that the Milky Way is a voracious cannibal that devours its neighbours.
"We've confirmed the Arcturus moving group as being a star stream, which indicates a disruptive galaxy spiralled into our own," he says.
"Ours is a large galaxy and it has been eating other galaxies; it's been hungry. We can see what it's eaten by the crumbs that are left over from its meal."
It's another bit of evidence for the now widely accepted cannibal, or accretion, theory of galactic evolution, Parker says.
According to this theory, the gravitational pull of large galaxies sucks in smaller ones, making large galaxies like our own a sort of cosmic melting pot.
Parker says the RAVE measurements show stars in the Arcturus group are travelling at a similar velocity and in a similar direction through space, indicating they were once part of a coherent system.
"Using ... star velocities it's possible for the first time begin to unravel the way our galaxy is constructed," he says.
The RAVE study is measuring the speed of a million stars in the Milky Way using radial velocity, or the motion of a star along the line of sight between the telescope and the star.
The huge scope of the survey has been made possible by the six degree field (6dF) spectrograph on the 1.2 metre UK Schmidt Telescope at the Anglo-Australian Observatory, which can obtain spectroscopic information for up to 150 stars at once.
The telescope splits light from the stars into a wide spectrum of colours and by looking at specific colours produced by calcium atoms astronomers can work out whether the colours have 'shifted' in the spectrum.
This enables them to work out aspects of the star's movement.
"We're looking at the stars in our galaxy and measuring their velocity by measuring how their lines have shifted," Parker says.
The survey has so far collected information about 90,000 stars and will release data on the remaining 65,000 as it's analysed.

The cane toad front is moving across Australia five times faster than it was in the 1940s
The invasion of the dreaded cane toad across Australia has taken a new turn with research showing the toxic toads are evolving longer legs that allow them to move faster.
This means they can encroach even faster on new territory, biologists say in today's issue of the journal Nature.
Cane toads (Bufo marinus) were introduced to Australia more than 70 years ago to control insect pests in cane fields. And their toxic nature and invasiveness have made them a major ecological menace.
The toads have expanded to cover more than a million square kilometres of the continent and are now progressing at a rate five times higher than in the 1940s to 1960s.
Professor Richard Shine from the University of Sydney and team stationed themselves at the invasion front 60 kilometres east of Darwin.
They then waited for the toads, which can travel almost two kilometres a night, to arrive. 
Measurements revealed that the 'super athletes' at the front of the pack had longer legs than those at the back.
Why are their legs longer?
Shine says there are two "possible" and "probable" explanations as to why toads at the front have longer legs.
The first is the conventional evolutionary reason, that there are advantages to being at the front.
Toads with longer legs have the first access to virgin territory full of juicy grubs, so the evolving species is favouring this characteristic.
The second explanation is more immediate and practical.
"These guys sort themselves out spatially because the only ones that can be at the front are the fast ones," says Shine.
Put simply, if the faster ones with the longest legs were at the back, they would trample the shorter slower ones ahead.
"So even if there is no evolutionary advantage to being at the front you are still going to end up with the front guys being the fast movers," he says.
Understanding the enemy
Shine says understanding the enemy is the first step in combating the toads in the future.
"People tend to take a very straightforward view that cane toads are bad and we just have to work out ways to kill lots of them. But history is telling us that that doesn't work that well," he says.
"What we need to do is find what kind of animal toads really are, what bits of the landscape they use, how they use it and what they depend on."

A new type of pulsar that spits out radio waves intermittently, rather than regularly, has been discovered
Scientists have discovered a strange new type of pulsar that emits intermittent bursts of radio waves. 
And there are lots of them out there. 
In a paper in the journal Nature today, an international team of astronomers estimates there could be up to half a million of these weird flashing 'dead' stars.
The scientists are calling them RRATs, or rotating radio transients.
Unlike ordinary pulsars, which can emit regular pulses of radio waves, RRATs emit short millisecond bursts of radio waves in between dark spells that may last several hours. 
This makes them very difficult to find, says co-author Dr Dick Manchester, from CSIRO's Australia Telescope National Facility, who has been hunting pulsars with the Parkes Radio Telescope for the past seven years.
"These things are so sporadic that most searches, like the survey we conducted, would have missed them. We only looked at each patch of the sky for 35 minutes so we were lucky to find any," he says.
"This means there must be a huge population out there, many more than ordinary pulsars." 
While there are about 100,000 ordinary pulsars in the Milky Way, astronomers estimate there are at least 400,000 RRATs.
This latest research could mean that scientists will have to come up with new ideas for the way so many RRATs have formed. 
Birth of a pulsar
Pulsars are believed to be formed in supernovae, the cataclysmic explosion that signals the end of the life of a massive star.
As the core collapses to a superdense neutron star it spins very rapidly, sending a beam of radiation that sweeps out like a searchlight.
If the beam is pointing towards Earth each 'pulse' can be detected, hence the name pulsar.
"We knew that RRATs were pulsars, even though the pulses were isolated, just a single burst and then they might shut up for an hour or two," says Manchester.
"But it was only by timing them over a four year period that it was realised that they had much longer periods than normal and that they were slowing down."
Magnetic, reborn or just plain weird?
The paper suggests that RRATs are young super magnetic pulsars barely 100,000 years old.
But Manchester is not ruling out the possibility that they may be 'zombies', old pulsars suddenly brought back to life by growing magnetic fields or ordinary pulsars radiating in an unusual way.
"That's what makes it exciting," he says. "There are so many possibilities."

Women value a good sense of humour in a potential male partner, even if his jokes are crass. But men don't rate humour so highly in women, new research shows
It's a trait often requested in lonely hearts ads and scientists have now shown that a good sense of humour is important for women, but not men, in choosing a romantic partner. 
A woman is even willing to overlook other shortcomings in a man if he can make her laugh, North American researchers say in the journal Evolution and Human Behavior. 
"Our results suggest that humour can positively affect desirability as a relationship partner but this effect is most likely to occur when men use humour and are evaluated by women," says Dr Eric Bressler, an assistant professor at Westfield State College in Massachusetts. 
Bressler and Canadian researcher Dr Sigal Balshine, an assistant professor at McMaster University in Ontario, demonstrated in an experiment that a good sense of humour, or GSOH as it appears in personal ads, does make a difference. 
They showed groups of women pictures of two equally attractive men and presented autobiographical statements that were either funny or serious. 
After reversing the experiment and showing groups of men photographs of two women, they asked both sexes to select who they would choose as a romantic partner.
The humorous people were seen as more socially adept but less trustworthy, honest and intelligent. Men did not select the funny person but women did. 
"Women chose funny men as relationship partners despite often rating them as less honest and intelligent," the researchers say.
Funny men were preferred even if their humour was unsophisticated, the researchers add.

Can censoring scientists be justified? No, according to the CSIRO scientists who say they've been banned from talking to the public about aspects of climate change
Allegations the Australian government has pressured some of its top scientists to keep quiet about the implications of climate change are just the tip of the iceberg of scientific censorship, commentators say.
According to the claims, aired on ABC TV's Four Corners program last night, senior CSIRO scientists Drs Graeme Pearman, Barney Foran and Barrie Pittock were regularly gagged from commenting on so-called policy issues, such as greenhouse gas emission targets and environmental refugees.
But at least one expert says there are times where government censorship of scientific research is justified and may be necessary.
Dr Michael Selgelid, who lecturers in bioethics at the University of Sydney, questions whether scientists should be able to publish research that could endanger the public.
For example, information that could be used to make nuclear weapons is censored and "we've been living with that for the last 60 years", he says.
He says governments should similarly be able to block publication of research that provides information about making biological weapons.
"If someone discovers an easy way of making something that's just as dangerous and contagious as smallpox  ... there would be really good grounds for censoring it despite the fact that free speech is important and that scientific openness is important."
He disagrees with suggestions that it should be a matter for journals to censor what they publish or for scientists to censor themselves.
"Scientists just don't have that kind of expertise and ... sometimes it's only the government that's going to have the information that's needed to do the risk assessment," he says.
Vested interests
Censorship is a different matter when it comes to the influence of vested interests, says Brian Martin, an associate professor in science, technology and society at the  University of Wollongong, who has published articles on the suppression of dissent in science.
He says this form of censorship is alive and well in Australia.
"In all my studies the thing that stands out is that a few cases that have become prominent. But for every one of those these's at least 10, maybe as many as 100 other cases which never receive any publicity," he says. 
Dr Mark Diesendorf is a former CSIRO chief scientist and is now a senior lecturer in environment studies at the University of New South Wales.
He accuses CSIRO of gagging him during the 1970s and 80s when he was involved in renewable energy research.
He says history is repeating itself with the latest allegations and with CSIRO's recent decision to move away from renewable energy research.
"Everyone at [CSIRO is] terrified the federal government will cut their budget unless they do exactly as they're told ... that and suppression of the [atmospheric research scientists] is well know to us who work in the energy policy field," he says.
A spokeswoman for CSIRO declined to comment, saying "I don't think we can possibly comment on something that happened 20 years ago."
She also describes Diesendorf's comments on a fear of budget cuts as "absolute rubbish".
Withholding funding
Diesendorf says withholding funding is another form of censorship, with many research grants now subject to ministerial approval and what he describes as unequal funding for Cooperative Reserch Centres (CRCs).
"There are three [CRCs] for fossil fuels [and] zero for renewable energy," he says.
"Research development for solar energy has shrunk, and there is no funding for windpower."
Diesendorf says he's particularly worried about what he describes as the "blatant muzzling" of scientists.
He says this means we risk policy decisions being made by vested interests such as big business, the military and powerful professions.
"Scientists are people who have expert knowledge so it means that policy decisions are made without expert knowledge or by the expert knowledge of vested interests only," he says.
"The very least we can expect in a democracy is that all sides have a right to present evidence that's relevant to policy."
Martin says we should be very worried about scientific censorship because it can affect human life.
"With climate change we're talking about risk to future generations. It's something that society should be paying attention to, it should be put on the agenda without fear or favour."
But censorship doesn't appear to be a universal experience for scientists.
"I have never been gagged about what I say to the media," says Monash University's Professor Patricia Vickers-Rich in a response to a poll by the Australian Science Media Centre.
"This is not a problem for this scientist. And that relates not only to issues on climate change, but also on issues relating to intelligent design, population, AIDS ... and I am frequently vocal on these issues."

Babies have an innate ability to do simple maths. While counting toes is beyond them, then can match voices to the number of people in a room
Even before babies learn to talk they have a bit of a grasp of maths, according to new research concluding that infants may have an abstract sense of numerical concepts. 
The US research, published in the latest issue of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, says seven-month-old babies demonstrate an ability to match the number of voices they hear to the number of faces they expect to see. 
The study of 20 infants by researchers at Duke University was similar to a previous experiment to demonstrate that monkeys show numerical perception across senses. 
In the new study, babies listened either to two or three women simultaneously saying the word 'look'. 
At the same time, the infants could choose between video images of two or three women saying the word. 
As they had found with the monkeys, the researchers say the babies spent significantly more time looking at the video image that matched the number of women talking. 
"As a result of our experiments, we conclude that the babies are showing an internal representation of 'two-ness' or three-ness' that is separate from sensory modalities and thus reflects an abstract internal process," writes researcher Dr Elizabeth Brannon, an assistant professor in psychological and brain sciences. 
"These results support the idea that there is a shared system between preverbal infants and nonverbal animals for representing numbers," she says. 
"What we do know is that somehow, very quickly, [the babies] acquire this ability to perceive number and divorce it from the sensory information." 
Understanding the research could be useful in devising methods for teaching basic maths skills to the very young, Brannon says.

The hormonal changes that teenage girls go through when they start their periods may explain why they have trouble sleeping
Adolescent girls appear to be at greater risk of insomnia after they begin menstruation, a study has found.
This suggests that hormonal changes play a role in developing the sleep disorder, the researchers say in the journal Pediatrics. 
Researchers found that among more than 1000 13- to 16-year-olds in the study, nearly 11% had suffered insomnia at some point.
Insomnia, based on formal clinical criteria, was defined as problems falling asleep or staying asleep at least four times a week for a month or longer. 
Typically, the study found, the teens started having sleep disturbances around the age of 11.
Before menstruation, girls were about as likely as boys to have insomnia.
But after they began their menstrual periods girls had more than twice the risk of insomnia as boys.
The findings suggest that the hormonal changes that come with menstruation contribute to girls' insomnia risk, according to the authors. 
Such a physiological reason is one of two broad explanations for why menstruation would be related to insomnia, says lead author Dr Eric Johnson. 
The other possibility is that the physical changes that come with puberty, like breast development, create "social pressures" that contribute to sleep problems, says Johnson, a researcher with RTI International.
But he says menstruation is related specifically to problems with staying asleep and getting enough deep sleep. 
These forms of insomnia are more likely to have physiological causes, whereas problems with falling asleep in the first place can often be stress-related. 
In addition, girls' higher risk of insomnia was not explained by higher rates of depression, which is often marked by sleep disturbances. 
A long lasting problem
Another key finding, Johnson says, is that of all teens who ever suffered insomnia, 88% also had symptoms at the time of the study. 
This, he says, signals that the problem is lasting for many teenagers. 
"Insomnia seems to be common and chronic among adolescents," Johnson and his colleagues conclude. 
Given the consequences of sleep deprivation among teenagers, including blunted mental acuity, poorer school performance, and even poorer physical and emotional health, prevention and treatment may need to become "important priorities", the researchers say. 
Therapies for insomnia include lifestyle changes to promote sleep, like getting to bed and rising at regular times each day, cognitive behavioral therapy and sleep medications.

A voodoo follower at an international celebration of voodoo spirituality in the West African country of Benin earlier this year
Priests who tear out the throats of live chickens in ritual sacrifices to voodoo gods may risk contracting bird flu now the deadly virus has reached Africa. 
Voodoo priests in Benin, which borders Nigeria where an outbreak of the deadly H5N1 virus was found in poultry last week, sacrifice animals to invoke blessings or favours from the gods. 
Officials in the tiny West African country, which is the home of the ancient religion, say spreading the word about bird flu may help to save the lives of voodoo devotees. 
"We have identified the groups at risk, including fetishists and followers of the voodoo cult who sometimes kill animals with their teeth," says Guillaume Hounsou-ve, director of livestock at Benin's agriculture ministry.
Sheep, goats and other animals are sometimes sacrificed, but the favourite offering is a chicken.
Priests commonly kill birds by ripping their throats out with their teeth or using a knife to cut their heads off.
Both methods would bring them into contact with chicken blood, one of the ways bird flu is thought to be spread to humans. 
The disease has killed more than 90 people in Asia and Turkey since 2003. 
Hounsou-ve and other senior officials in Benin have spent the past few days drafting an action plan to counter bird flu. 
"We will target our messages, above all in regions where there are 'convents'," says Hounsou-ve, referring to the houses used for voodoo rituals. 
A common practice
An estimated 60% of Benin's 7 million people practise voodoo, although many also follow other religions like Christianity or Islam. 
Voodoo convents are found across Benin but more commonly in southern areas near the Atlantic seaboard. 
Once known as the Slave Coast, many thousands of Africans were shipped from here by European traders during more than three centuries of slave trading.
Many took their voodoo beliefs with them to the New World, notably Haiti, where rites and traditions from different parts of Africa met and evolved. 
Voodoo in West Africa and the Caribbean encompasses a wide range of rituals, from sacrificing animals to dancing, in which devotees fall into trances said to be a form of possession by gods.

Is the court making different rules for copyright protection in the online world?
Record companies are being given the power to veto the design of new digital communication technologies, say advocates of online civil liberties.
The claim, by Electronic Frontiers Australia (EFA), comes on the eve of an appeal against a landmark ruling last year against providers of the internet file-sharing software Kazaa.
Kazaa is one of a number of free software packages that allow people to swap files over the internet.
Record companies complain that such peer-to-peer file-sharing software leads to people illegally downloading their copyrighted music.
And last year they took the providers of Kazaa software to the Federal Court of Australia.
The court found the providers guilty of "authorising" copyright infringement by encouraging millions of users to download music from artists ranging from Powderfinger and Radiohead to Christine Anu and Robbie Williams.
The court also ordered the providers of Kazaa to modify the software to contain filters that would make it difficult for users to search for copyrighted works specified by the record companies.
On Monday 20 February, the providers of Kazaa will appeal against this decision. And the EFA, with the New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties and the Australian Consumers' Association, is applying to take part in the appeal.
EFA is also worried that this Kazaa ruling could one day lead to email providers inappropriately monitoring, filtering or blocking messages.
Concerns
Record companies focus on the illegal uses of peer-to-peer file-sharing software. But EFA is worried last year's Kazaa ruling, and the order to modify the software, will hinder people who want to use it legally.
It says filtering may catch files that are not infringing copyright, for example music already in the public domain or music deliberately distributed free by independent music groups.
And EFA also doesn't think record companies should be able to control the design of new digital communication technologies.
"If this type of precedent is allowed to stand," says EFA vice-chair, Dale Clapperton, "it's essentially going to give the record labels a veto power over the development of new technology."
The Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) disagrees.
"No-one who read the judgement could form this view," an ARIA spokesperson says. "The operators of Kazaa did not even suggest this."
ARIA also rejects claims that filters will stop legitimate downloads.
"A well-constructed filter that targets infringing files will have no effect on legitimate files on the Kazaa system," the ARIA spokesperson says.
A new precedent
Clapperton says last year's Kazaa ruling shows the court is treating online copyright infringement in a different way to past infringements.
He says when a court first found an Australian university library guilty of authorising copyright infringement by allowing students to photocopy books, it ruled that libraries should put up warning signs.
"The court didn't ban the photocopiers, it didn't order that the photocopiers should be modified to reduce the potential that they be used for infringing purposes," says Clapperton.
Similarly, he says, video recorder were not banned when movie studios complained that they could be used to infringe copyright when taping television programs.
"If they'd succeeded, we wouldn't have [video] machines today and we would almost certainly not have things like iPods."
Stifling innovation?
EFA says it's early days for digital communication software, and if providers are made responsible for how their product is used this could reduce competition.
"You could end up with a situation where the only people who produce products are the ones already tied in with the music labels," says Clapperton.
"It really is going to stifle the development of new technologies."
ARIA rejects these claims.
"There is no evidence that there is any reduction in competition or innovation following the decision," says the spokesperson. "The opposite has happened with the launch of many more digital download services including iTunes."
Other possible impacts?
EFA chair Matt Black is adamant the Kazaa case should be overturned because the precedent could affect email providers, instant messaging and even Google.
Black says software like Gmail has the capacity for large files to be transferred via the internet and if the principle of the Kazaa ruling is applied here, you may see Google, which runs Gmail, filtering email.
"Then you're looking at a situation where very important communications are being monitored, filtered and potentially blocked inappropriately by your email provider."

There's more to the flow of water down terraces like these than meets the mathematician's eye
A mathematical equation that attempts to model the distribution of water in rice terraces has convinced one researcher that the Western notion of maths has a lot to learn from other cultures.
Mathematician Willy Alangui of the University of the Philippines Baguio spoke about his attempt to model rice terrace irrigation this week at the Third International Conference on Ethnomathematics in Auckland, New Zealand.
Alangui has been studying irrigation in a network of rice paddy terraces built by the indigenous Kankanaey people of the Northern Philippines.
"I'm trying to understand how water is efficiently distributed in all the paddies," says Alangui.
The paddies are contained by stone walls and farmers ensure everyone gets enough water by opening and closing inlets and outlets as the water flows from the top terraces to the bottom.
Alangui developed an equation to model the dynamics of water distribution.
The model took account of variables such as the amount of water flowing into the system, the rate of evaporation and the size and elevation of the paddies.
"For me as a mathematician it explained nicely the dynamics that goes on in the distribution of water in the whole network of paddies," he says.
But when he went back to validate the variables he had used with the Kankanaey people he found his model was seriously flawed.
It failed to account for one major factor that governs the Kankanaey rice irrigation system: the ethic of co-operation.
The social responsibility factor
Alangui found out the system depended on a notion of "social responsibility". 
Even when water was scarce, people upstream shared water equally with those downstream because they had helped to build the irrigation system in the first place.
This told him the system would fail if the paddy owner at the top of the hill took more water than was fair.
Alangui says the failure of his model to capture the ethical dimension of the irrigation system told him that he needed to broaden his perspective as a mathematician.
In the PhD thesis, Alangui will try and modify the model to include this ethic although, he says, it may not be possible.
"My mathematics may be deficient," he says. "It's not the be all and end all of everything. It's just one way of looking at the world."
Ethnomathematics
Alangui thinks Western mathematics has a lot to learn from other cultures, hence his interest in ethnomathematics, the connections between mathematics and culture.
He says Western mathematics has become "powerful" and "arrogant" as a field and marginalised other perspectives.
Maori culture, for example, has a different concept of numbers, says Alangui. While western culture uses the number 'three' as an adjective, in for example the phrase 'three glasses', Maori talk of glasses interacting with each other, and as being in the act of 'three-ing'.
In Kankanaey culture, he says, there is no concept of a circle as a static object, defined by a centre and a radius. Rather, there is the concept of 'encircling', in which a circle is defined as point moving around a circumference.
Alangui says mathematicians should ask why the static version of numbers or circles has come to dominate. Interrogating long-held assumptions like this could lead to different and useful concepts in maths, he says.
He says hyperbolic and elliptic geometry were developed when mathematicians questioned the assumption of Euclidian geometry that two parallel lines never meet.
Alangui is a member of the Kankanaey people and has a masters degree in pure maths.

Light from Saturn's rings illuminates the storm, where lightning strikes are 1000 more powerful than ones on Earth
For nearly a month, a huge storm with massive lightning has been raging on Saturn under the watchful eye of the Cassini spacecraft. 
It was a Cassini ear, a radio receiver, that first detected the storm on 23 January. And this week, scientists finally coaxed an image from Cassini's camera. 
Sunlight reflecting off the planet's rings provided enough light during the Saturn night for Cassini's camera to pick out the storm and cloud features.
Researchers now are working hard to identify spots within the storm that could be lightning. 
The only other place in the solar system besides Earth where lightning has been positively identified is on Jupiter. 
"Cassini's radio detector is on all the time," says planetary meteorologist Professor Andrew Ingersoll, with the California Institute of Technology and a member of the Cassini science team.
"Months go by and there is no radio noise from Saturn. Then all of a sudden, in the space of a day, they get it. That's what happened on 23 January." 
The radio emissions are similar to the popping and crackling that you might hear if you were driving through a thunderstorm with an AM radio on.
What is generally thought of as radio interference is actually radio waves generated by lightning. 
Behind the storm
Scientists are not sure what causes the lighting on Saturn, but they believe it is triggered by the same process that creates lightning on Earth. 
"On Earth, we think the convection in thunderstorms is important in the process of separating positive charges from negative charges. And if you separate enough charges, you build up a very large potential field between those separated charges," says University of Iowa's Dr Bill Kurth, the deputy principal investigator of Cassini's radio and plasma wave science instrument. 
"Nature doesn't like that, and it tries to correct the situation by running a current between the two separated charges. That forms a very large spark, there's an awful lot of energy that's released, and it's meant to basically allow the negative charges and the positive charges to get back together again," Kurth says. 
On Saturn, the phenomena manifests itself on a gigantic scale, with lighting bolts more than 1000 times stronger than strikes on Earth, the radio data reveals. The storm itself spans an area larger than continental US. 
Why Saturn should have such massive storms is a mystery. The planet gets only about 1% of the sunlight that reaches Earth, so there is much less energy to drive storms, Ingersoll says.
"Given that, there are two possibilities: one is that you have the same number of storms that you have on Earth, but they are weaker; or two, they are just as strong but there are fewer." 
While more studies are needed, Ingersoll favours the second explanation.
"This storm certainly looks more vigorous and the radio emissions are more powerful deep down, [so] there may be more water in the atmosphere than on Earth," Ingersoll says. 
Amateurs beat the professionals
The first images of the storm actually came from two ground-based amateur astronomers, not the Cassini spacecraft. 
From its present orbital perch, Cassini has been unable to image the sunlit side of Saturn.
The team studying the radio emissions, however, decided to ask the amateur astronomy community if anyone had any pictures of Saturn that corresponded to where radio emissions were coming from. 
Within hours, two astronomers near Paris submitted the first visual confirmation of the storm. 
Their findings were confirmed by the Cassini images shot in darkness with illumination from the planet's rings.

Buying a house? New research shows it's best for our unconscious to work on big decisions
When faced with a major decision, such as buying a car or a house, it's best to do your homework, then forget about it for a while and let your unconscious churn through the options.
According to the results of a novel study published today in the journal Science, unconscious deliberation may lead to a more satisfying choice than mere conscious deliberation alone, at least for major decisions. 
Conscious deliberation is fine for the less important, more mundane everyday choices like deciding which shampoo or towels to buy, but not for bigger decisions, the report indicates. 
Four investigators in the department of psychology at the University of Amsterdam, confirm the value of what they call the "deliberation-without-attention" hypothesis in a series of studies on consumer choice.
The did the experiments in the laboratory and in real life among shoppers in department stores. 
Decisions, decisions
For example, in a car-shopping experiment, participants read a complex series of facts about cars they were thinking of buying. Immediately afterwards, they were given puzzles to keep their conscious selves busy. 
After working on the puzzles, this group of shoppers reported greater satisfaction with their car choice than the people who were given no puzzles and had to decide which car to buy immediately after consciously pondering the facts. 
But for making simple decisions, such as choosing between different sets of towels, conscious deliberations were all that was needed to make satisfying choices. 
There are several possible reasons why conscious thought sometimes leads to poor judgment, the researchers say. Consciousness has a "low capacity" causing individuals to consider only a subset of relevant information and they may inappropriately weight the importance or relevance of this information. 
In contrast, the human subconscious has a higher capacity to integrate more information, which can lead to better choices. 
First, gather all the information
"The take-home message is that when you have to make a decision, the first step should be to get all the information necessary for the decision," says author Dr Ap Dijksterhuis.
"Once you have the information, you have to decide, and this is best done with conscious thought for simple decisions, but left to unconscious thought, to 'sleep on it', when the decision is complex." 
The novel finding from these studies is the "idea that we can think unconsciously and that unconscious thought is actually superior to conscious thought for complex decisions", the researcher adds.

Poultry farmers burn chicken carcasses in Nigeria, a country that has just started investigating suspected human cases of the H5N1 bird flu virus. Now scientists are preparing for a worst-case scenario: a human bird flu pandemic
A human vaccine against the deadly H5N1 strain of bird flu virus has successfully passed the first stages in testing its safety and effectiveness, reports the manufacturer.
The trial, carried out at the Murdoch Childrens Research Institute with the University of Melbourne and the Royal Adelaide Hospital, recently tested a vaccine made by CSL Ltd of Melbourne.
CSL today announced that the vaccine triggered an immune response it predicts will equate with "a good level of protection" in "about half" of the 400 healthy adult volunteers tested. 
And, says Dr Andrew Cuthbertson, CSL's chief scientific officer, the participants got little more than the odd sore arm.
"It was very reassuring in a safety sense."
The vaccine was based on a deactivated virus originally taken from a Vietnamese patient. 
It was then grown up in fertilised chicken eggs, killed and mixed with an aluminium phosphate adjuvant before being given to volunteers.
Cuthbertson says the trial found immune stimulation occurred at two antigen doses of 7.5 microgram and two of 15 micrograms, although greater stimulation occurred at the double 15 microgram dose, which is the dose used in normal flu shots.
While it is generally assumed the higher the immune stimulation, the greater the protection, Cuthbertson says no one knows yet precisely what immune level will protect. 
Further safety and efficacy studies
CSL says it now plans to organise a second trial to study the safety and effectiveness of the vaccine in 800 other healthy volunteers, in particular children and older people who respond differently to vaccines.
It also plans to test the impact of higher doses of vaccine to clarify the dose that gives the best immune response.
He hopes the vaccine could be registered some time in the first half of 2007.
But, says Cuthbertson, if the vaccine is eventually registered, it will be a matter for governments and regulatory agencies to decide the lowest dose that can protect the most number of people.
How ready are we?
CSL says if a bird flu pandemic arrived now, and it was directed by the government to do so, they would be able to produce the vaccine as it is in six weeks.
But, if the pandemic strain mutated from the H5N1 to a strain more readily transmitted to humans, he says the time frame could be stretched.
"If [the virus] was not too different we would proceed to crank out as much vaccine as possible of the one that we made already," says Cuthbertson.
If it was very different CSL would have to switch to making a new vaccine and this would take another six weeks.
Cuthbertson says registering a vaccine against the H5N1 strain will still save time even if the eventual pandemic strain is different because the Therapeutic Goods Administration has told CSL it would not have to repeat clinical trials.
"It's making the assumption that the safety profile and so forth will be similar," he says.
Other trials?
While there have been many attempts to make a vaccine around the world, there have been few results of clinical trials announced, says Professor Aileen Plant, chief executive officer of the Australian Biosecurity Cooperative Research Centre at Curtin University and a consultant to the World Health Organization.
"It is exciting, really ... I don't think there's been anywhere else that's been able to get that sort of immunological response with two doses of 15 micrograms," says Plant, who also sits on the federal government's National Influenza Pandemic Action Committee.
She says a US trial last year that did not use an adjuvant had to give substantially more antigen to get an immune response, which means fewer people could be vaccinated.
Plant agrees that the vaccine could be used in an emergency, despite the missing data on children and elderly people.
"If the pandemic came tomorrow, the risks would be so high that we would say that it was worth going with it even if we didn't have the data."

Researchers have put insulin producing cells like this into tiny capsules as a treatment for type 1 diabetes
Encapsulating insulin producing cells in tiny seaweed bubbles and injecting them into people with type 1 diabetes could one day remove the need for daily insulin injections, an Australian researcher says.
Professor Bernie Tuch of the University of New South Wales launched a trial of the technology this week, using capsules made from the seaweed derivative alginate and measuring just 300 micrometres across.
Tuch says if the trial works, it will mean that insulin producing cells, or islets, can be transplanted, effectively reversing type 1 diabetes, without the need for immunosuppressive drugs.
This is because the capsules protect the transplanted cells from being sought out and destroyed by the body's immune system.
The capsules also contain tiny holes that let the insulin flow out while allowing oxygen and nutrients in.
"The concept of the seaweed is that it forms a coating around the islets ... with holes that are small enough to prevent immune cells entering," Tuch says.
The trial, involving a 51-year woman who was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes 40 years ago, is the first of its kind in Australia.
Tuch's team at the Diabetes Transplant Unit at Sydney's Prince of Wales Hospital has previously tested the method in animals.
An Italian group began a similar human trial two years ago but is using capsules made from a different material.
About 75,000 capsules
During Monday's half-hour procedure the woman was injected with 75,000 capsules containing a total of around 200,000 islet cells.
The islets had been isolated from a cadaver and put into the capsules in a procedure Tuch compares to blowing soap bubbles.
"There's the alginate, there's your cells and there's air," he says.
"You blow the air and the alginate and the cells together and it's like blowing soap bubbles; they come out with the cells inside the capsules."
The capsules were injected into the patient's abdomen where it's hoped they will start producing insulin within 24 hours, allowing her to slowly begin reducing her insulin injections. 
Tuch says one injection could potentially last a lifetime although it's not yet known whether the current patient will need extra injections.
What could go wrong?
Immunologist Dr Bronwyn O'Brien, who is working with a team from the University of Technology Sydney to genetically engineer liver cells so they produce insulin, says Tuch's method is promising but may have complications.
"In practice one of the big problems is that ... often islets that are in the centre of the capsule become hypoxic, they're not getting oxygen, and they die," she says.
"The implications would be the cells would break up into possibly small enough pieces that could leave the capsule."
There's also a chance that immune cells could grow around the outside of the capsules, blocking the flow of insulin, she says.
And while the pores in the capsules are big enough to keep T cells and antibodies out, there's still a chance that cytokines, the so-called messengers of the immune system, will slip through and produce an inflammatory response.
Tuch acknowledges this risk and says the patient received anti-inflammatory drugs as a precaution.
"We don't anticipate there is going to be a major inflammatory response but if they do get in then the islets may be destroyed," he says.
Not just for diabetes
The concept of microencapsulation as a means of avoiding rejection drugs could apply to any transplant involving cells, Tuch says, and in particular stem cell therapies.
"The concept of using capsules is certainly something that is reaching its clinical testing and time will tell what it has to offer," he says.

The search for life on other planets is homing in on a handful of solar systems that resemble our own. But not everyone agrees this is the best approach
Astronomers looking for extraterrestrial life now have a short list of places to point their telescopes. 
They include nearby stars of the right size, age and composition to have Earth-like planets circling them, scientists say.
But cuts in US federal funding mean that private philanthropists, who pay for the bulk of their work, may find out first when and if extraterrestrial life is discovered, the astronomers told a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Dr Margaret Turnbull of the Carnegie Institution of Washington released her top 10 list of potential stars to the meeting.
They will be the first targets of NASA's Terrestrial Planet Finder, a system of two orbiting observatories scheduled for launch by 2020.
"There are 400 billion stars in the galaxy, and obviously we're not going to point the Terrestrial Planet Finder ... at every one of them," says Turnbull. 
So, on behalf of NASA and the now independently funded Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence, or SETI, she narrowed down the list to stars that could have planets with liquid water orbiting them. 
"We want to see these habitable planets with our own eyes," she adds. So the star cannot be too bright, or it will obscure the planet. 
Variable stars, which grow hotter and cooler, probably would not be conducive to life, so they are thrown out, as are stars that are too young or too old. 
Some are too gassy to have spawned planets like Earth, which contains a lot of metal. Others have massive companions whose gravity could interfere with the steady conditions needed for life to evolve. 
Top 10 list
Turnbull's top 10 list includes 51 Pegasus, where in 1995 Swiss astronomers spotted the first planet outside our solar system, a Jupiter-like giant. 
Others include 18 Sco in the Scorpio constellation, which is very similar to the Sun; epsilon Indi A, a star one-tenth as bright as the Sun; and alpha Centauri B, part of the closest solar system to our own. 
"The truth is when looking at these so-called 'habstars', habitable solar systems, it is hard to really rank them. I don't know enough about every star to say which one is the absolute best one," Turnbull says. 
But Dr Carol Cleland of the University of Colorado argues that astronomers are limiting themselves by looking for planets that closely resemble Earth. 
"I actually think we ought to be looking for life as we don't know it," Cleland says.
She says life on Earth is all so similar, based on DNA made up of specific building blocks, that it is likely to have had a single origin.
Life elsewhere may be built from different ingredients, or structured very differently, she says.
Feeling the pinch
Dr Jill Tarter of the SETI Institute, set up after US government funding for the program was cut, says the current budget threatens other astronomical programs.
She says research and analysis budgets were cut by 15% in the fiscal year 2007 budget proposed this year by US President George W Bush. 
"In the case of astrobiology, the cut is to 50% of what it was in 2005," Tarter says. "We are facing what we consider an extraordinarily difficult financial threat." 
She says NASA once had a policy of what to do, who to call, and how to announce the news if someone detected a signal of intelligent life from space. 
"Today it is in fact a group of very generous philanthropists who will get the call before we get a press conference," Tarter says.
They include Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen and Microsoft chief technology officer Nathan Myhrvold.

Some children with autism really can empathise with others, researchers say
People with autism are more intelligent and able to function better than previously believed, experts say.
But mistrust of doctors, biased tests and the internet have bred myths about the condition.
At a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, researchers presented reports showing that even people with autism who do not speak can have above-average intelligence.
They also offered additional studies disputing claims that vaccines can cause autism. 
"The current figures are that 75% of autistic people are mentally retarded, with the mute the most ... impaired," says Canadian researcher Dr Laurent Mottron, an autism researcher at Montreal's H&ocirc;pital Rivi&egrave;re-des-Prairies. 
But Mottron believes the wrong intelligence tests are used to assess autistic children.
Many are tested using the Wechsler scale, a common IQ test that includes questions about words and concepts learned in school. 
The Raven's Progressive Matrices test measures abstract reasoning and consistently gives autistic children higher scores, Mottron says. 
The average boost in score is 30 points, Mottron says, enough to put someone previously considered mentally retarded into the normal range and the average to gifted status. 
Mottron was so impressed by the abilities of one autistic student, Michelle Dawson, that he made her a co-author of some of his papers. 
Autism is a term used to describe a broad range of symptoms, from an inability to use language normally, to exhibiting deeply disturbed and repetitive behaviours. 
Professor Morton Gernsbacher at the University of Wisconsin-Madison questioned a common idea among autism researchers that autistic people lack a 'theory of mind'. This, among other things, gives an ability to empathise with others.
Again, she says, the wrong tests are used to assess this ability. 
Is there an autism epidemic
Dr Judith Grether, a California epidemiologist, says she questions the idea that there is a new autism epidemic. 
She says it is impossible to find out how many cases of autism there were in the past, because many people with autism were often diagnosed as retarded, or never diagnosed.
Without that information, it is impossible to say if the number of cases has grown, she says. 
"We have to do the studies to find the answers," she says. 
Grether says US researchers have begun taking prenatal blood samples from pregnant women and will look for clues when and if some of their children are diagnosed with autism.
They are examining hormones, heavy metals, immune system proteins and other factors. 
The studies found no link with vaccines, says Dr Irving Gottesman, a psychiatrist at the University of Minnesota, but says the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has initiated four studies "to tie up the loose ends". 
New studies are focusing on genetic susceptibilities. 
Link with vaccines
Gottesman says the studies may help to ease the fears of parents that a vaccine-autism link has been covered up. 
But he says scientists are battling a plethora of websites devoted to the idea that mercury causes autism like http://www.safeminds.org. 
Gernsbacher, the mother of a child with autism, says some parents may join these lobbying groups over the advice of doctors because they get "pat answers" to initial concerns about their children.
Many may have been told that boys develop later than girls, for instance. 
"The mistrust [of government-funded studies and of their paediatricians] may have arisen from those kind of experiences," she says.

Leaves with jagged edges like these maple leaves allow better uptake of nutrients at the start of the growing season, when temperatures are cooler
Leaves with 'toothed' edges help trees, shrubs and other plants cope with the cold, US researchers say.
And studying leaves from ancient and existing plants could help to reveal past and present climates, they say in the current isssue of the International Journal of Plant Sciences.
They say these climates are critical for determining periods of global warming and other profound temperature changes. 
Dr Dana Royer, who authored the study with Dr Peter Wilf at Pennsylvania State University, says that the jagged, pointy edges on leaves are packed with xylem, a tissue that transports water and nutrients in sap.
Most of the liquid evaporates by leaving the teeth through minuscule pores. 
"In the springtime when leaves are just starting to leaf out, leaves with teeth are, on average, losing more water than leaves without teeth," says Royer, now an assistant professor of earth and environmental sciences at Wesleyan University. 
"This loss of water helps pull more sap up from the roots. Thus trees with toothed leaves probably have a higher rate of sap flow early in the spring than toothless leaves.
"This is important because it delivers nutrients to the developing leaves, helping to 'jumpstart' their photosynthetic season. As you move to colder and colder climates with shorter and shorter growing seasons, it becomes increasingly beneficial to have teeth," he adds. 
What transpires?
The researchers measured such moisture evaporation, or transpiration, and photosynthesis activity for leaves on 60 woody species from two regions with differing climates: Pennsylvania and North Carolina. 
They determined that both energy-gathering activity and transpiration increased at jagged leaf edges by up to 45% during the first 30 days of the spring growing season. Leaves without teeth did not exhibit such a marked increase. 
The scientists also found that plants native to colder climates, like those in Pennsylvania's south central York County, had toothy edges that were especially active. 
But possessing teeth may not always be advantageous for leaves since the teeth also promote more water loss. Plants in drier regions seem to be better off if they have fewer teeth or are toothless. 
Not everyone agrees
Another theory, proposed by Taylor Field at Taylor University, holds that leaf teeth serve as a sort of 'release valve' that prevents too much sap from collecting in the leaf. 
Professor Judith Totman Parrish, dean of the College of Science at the University of Idaho, says she thinks the jury is still out on why plants have leaf teeth. 
"I think the authors have identified a very interesting problem and have made progress toward trying to answer it. As to whether this is the ultimate answer, that remains to be seen with further studies, but the authors have kicked off a promising line of research," Parrish says.
Royer says the research is important because "we on Earth today are experiencing rapid climate change. A problem with trying to understand our current climate change is that it is an unreplicated experiment".

Physicians in the Middle Ages inspected urine by holding it up to the light
The colour of your urine can tell a lot about your health, says a researcher who's concerned that modern medicine is overlooking this time honoured diagnostic tool.
The Australian researcher says the ancient practice of examining patients' urine could help doctors to monitor medication, pinpoint disease and in some cases avoid costly and invasive tests.
Dr Carole Foot, an intensive care specialist at Queensland's Prince Charles Hospital, publishes a paper on what she calls the 'uroscopic rainbow' in the Postgraduate Medical Journal.
The ancient Greeks first diagnosed the rare blood disorder porphyria by observing colourful urine and even named the illness after the Greek word for purple.
Then in the Middle Ages, when urine analysis enjoyed its heyday, specimens were routinely examined in a matula, or urine glass, held up to the light.
Foot says urine analysis could help today.
She says the idea for the paper hit her after being on a ward round and discovering a number of patients had discoloured urine.
"Here we were with these highly sophisticated monitoring devices that tell us all sorts of things about our critically ill patients and here we are doing something as old fashioned as looking at urine," she says.
Urine in the hospital
Foot says urine can provide information about whether patients are taking certain medications or are being over-administered.
For example, propofol, a common sedative in critical care wards, turns urine pink if given in the right dose but green if patients are getting too much.
"That's a signal for us to think about reducing the amount of propofol we're giving," she says.
And the antibiotic rifampicin, used as an adjunct to other antibiotics and sometimes as a treatment for tuberculosis, turns urine and other secretions including tears, orange. This means it's being properly absorbed. 
"If you take a sample of urine and it's orange you know the patient's taking their tablets," Foot says.
"It certainly can be used as an agent to monitor compliance."
 Using urine to diagnose disease
Dark brown or tea coloured urine can indicate infection in patients who have undergone heart or valve operations because it suggests the patient is haemolysing, or breaking down red cells.
Urine that turns black when exposed to air can also be a sign of alkaptonuria, a rare enzyme disorder that causes abnormalities of the skin and cartilages. And gout can produce pink urine.
Foot says there are other ways of diagnosing these conditions today.
"But what's interesting is that the way a lot of these conditions came to be diagnosed was based on ... people back in the Middle Ages noticing abnormalities in the urine."
Using urine to rule out problems
Looking at urine can also help to rule out serious complications.
Foot says a GP who sees a patient with red urine may jump to conclusions about something sinister.
This is because red urine points to bleeding and blood in the urine almost always means something abnormal.
But a simple question could make it clear that the urine is red because a patient is menstruating.
Eating beetroot, blackberry and rhubarb can also turn some people's urine red while blue-green urine can also be a sign a patient is drinking too much mouthwash.
"I've seen people worked up about complex problems when they just didn't ask the patient something simple," Foot says.
What should your urine look like?
In a healthy person, urine ranges in colour from almost clear to bright yellow because of a pigment known as urochrome.
But once the urochrome becomes concentrated, urine can go dark yellow or brownish, which suggests it's time for a drink.
"It's a marker of hydration [which can] be used as a marker of whether you're drinking enough fluid, particularly in summer," Foot says.
But urine inspection isn't always fail-proof, she says, because individual urine pH levels and genetic factors can influence whether or not certain substances discolour it.

Circuit boards of the future could house smaller, more powerful chips made with existing technology
Current chip-making technology could make computer processors even tinier and cheaper than first thought, researchers have discovered.
Researchers at US technology firm IBM, who released their findings at a Silicon Valley technology conference, says the industry now has a reprieve from switching to more costly, unproven chip-making methods. 
The commonly-used process of optical lithography has the potential to make chip circuitry more than a third as narrow as is standard in electronics today, according to IBM.
This would mean a higher-density memory or higher memory capacity in a small package, the company says.
It will be up to chip producers to invest in developing the technology, according to the company. 
"Our goal is to push optical lithography as far as we can so the industry does not have to move to any expensive alternatives until absolutely necessary," says Robert Allen, a manager at IBM's Almaden Research Center in San  Jose. 
"This result is the strongest evidence to date that the industry may have at least seven years of breathing room before any radical changes in chip-making techniques would be needed." 
What's behind the push?
The discovery that computer components can be smaller, cheaper, and higher capacity than once thought came amid a worldwide technology push toward more versatile and compact handheld devices. 
IBM scientists have created the tiniest, high-quality line patterns ever made using deep-ultraviolet optical lithography, a technology currently used to  'print' circuits on chips. 
The distinct and uniformly spaced ridges are just under 30 nanometres wide, IBM says.
This is about one-third the size of the 90 nanometre features now in mass production and below the 32 nanometres that industry consensus held as the limit for optical lithography techniques, according to the researchers. 
What's Moore's law?
For decades, the semiconductor industry has relied on continually shrinking circuits to drive increases in the performance and function of chips and the products that use them, according to industry experts. 
As chip features now approach the fundamental scale limits of individual atoms and molecules, the future of this trend of relentless improvement, referred to as Moore's law, is in jeopardy, IBM scientists say. 
IBMs new result indicates that a 'high-index immersion' variant of lithography may provide a path for extending Moores law, buying the industry time.

Cyclones will affect more people as coastal populations boom, according to the latest scientific statement
Climate change can't be blamed for any of the events that made the past tropical cyclone season the worst in recent times, a report by a group of international experts says.
"No single high impact tropical cyclone event of 2004 and 2005 can be directly attributed to global warming," it says in a report submitted to the World Meteorological Organization's (WMO) Commission for Atmospheric Sciences, which is meeting in South Africa .
Dr John McBride is a principal research scientist at Australia's Bureau of Meteorology and reports to the WMO on the effects of climate change on tropical weather.
He is also chair of the international WMO committee that produced the report.
McBride says the report came as an attempt to separate fact from fiction in relation to recent controversy about the role of climate change in producing tropical cyclones.
McBride says there's no doubt that the latest season was the most ferocious in recent times, with a series of vicious cyclones including Hurricane Katrina that devastated New Orleans.
"These last two years were probably the most severe ... since the satellite era began [about 40 years ago]," he says.
But he says evidence linking this to climate change is inconclusive or lacking.
The case against climate change
A current argument suggests that as climate change causes the seas to warm the oceans store more energy that can be harnessed by the wind to form tropical cyclones.
But this is too simplistic, McBride says.
"There are other conditions that are necessary to be able to tap that energy source, such as the structure of the wind systems," he says.
McBride says there's no proof that cyclones have become more common or will become more frequent in the future, or that they'll take place in more parts of the world.
"Worldwide, there's really no evidence for any change," he says.
He says the report also questions claims that tropical cyclones have become more intense over the past 50 years, saying data used in the past may be inaccurate or incomplete because of limitations with the technology of the day.
The rising damage toll
McBride says it's true that the cost of cyclones, in terms of life and property, appears to be rising.
But he says this is because more people are living on the coast, not because cyclones are becoming more severe.
"There's a public perception that we're getting disasters everywhere and part of this is due to the fact that there are so many people living in vulnerable areas," he says.
"Given no change in tropical cyclone behaviour at all you will still get an increase in insurance damage and the financial scale of damage because of increasing coastal infrastructure."
Sea levels
What is of concern, McBride says, is strong evidence that sea levels are rising. 
In this way climate change may have an indirect effect on the potential for tropical cyclones to cause damage because of increasing storm surges from the sea.
This means that even if there is no change in tropical cyclones their potential to cause death and damage will increase if sea levels rise, he says.

Frogs produce a range of chemicals in their skins, including ones that smell like cashew nuts. Now scientists say some of these chemicals repel insects 
Some Australian frogs create their own insect repellent, some resembling rotten meat and others roasted cashew nuts or thyme leaves, researchers find.
The research team, which includes Associate Professor Mike Tyler of the University of Adelaide and entomologist Dr Craig Williams from James Cook University, publishes its findings online in the journal Biology Letters. 
Frogs produce a number of chemicals in their skin, including hallucinogens, glues and antimicrobials, to ward off infection and stop other animals from trying to eat them.
"We wanted to test Professor Tyler's [belief] that they should also produce an insect repellent," says Williams.
The research team studied five species of Australian frogs, including the Australian green tree frog.
Using massage and acupuncture techniques, they stimulated the muscles beneath the frogs' skins to produce secretions.
"What we found was that frogs produce a variety of chemicals in their skin and these ooze out of the pores of their skin when they are stressed," says Williams. 
The secretions, some of which repel mosquitos, have different smells depending on a number of factors such as what the frog eats.
"The frogs produce hundreds of chemicals and one frog's smell might be made up of six or seven different chemicals, so they all smell quite different," Williams says.
"The chemicals evaporate very quickly from the skin and it's the volatile smell that repels [the mosquitos]."
A new mosquito repellent?
The team found that skin secretions from an Australian green tree frog, for example, protected a mouse from mosquitos when the secretion was applied.
The researchers say this is the first time a vertebrate has been found to have its own in-built mosquito repellent.
But the frog secretion was not as repellent as DEET, diethyl-m-toluamide, the ingredient in most commercial mosquito sprays.
Williams doesn't believe that a new brand of natural insect repellent will result from the research. 
"The smell is just not very good ... some smell of rotting flesh, some of nuts, some of thyme leaves."
Last year the frog-sniffing research team won an Ig Nobel prize for its work on skin secretions.
The prizes honour "achievements that first make people laugh, and then make them think".
At the time, the researchers talked about frog smells that reminded them of Bombay curry and cut grass.

Most of the world's sharks live at depths that commercial trawlers can access, a new study shows
Ocean depths beyond 2000 metres are almost devoid of sharks, a finding that is grim news for these threatened fish, a study finds. 
An international team of researchers publishes its findings in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
The researchers used deep-sea trawls, baited hooks and baited cameras to see where sharks live, testing depths in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans and Mediterranean Sea from 471 to 5900 metres.
They generally saw or caught sharks at up to 2000 metres, but there were few sharks beyond this depth.
The deepest specimen was the leafscale gulper shark, caught at 3280 metres.
This means that there are no reserves of sharks living in the abysses, rarely-explored depths that are beyond 3000 metres that comprise 70% of the oceans' volume.
As a result, almost all sharks are within reach of modern deep-sea trawlers, which can net fish to a depth of up to 2300 metres. 
"Sharks are apparently confined to about 30% of the total ocean, and distribution of many species is fragmented around sea mounts, ocean ridges and ocean margins," says the paper, which mentions other chondrichthyes, a category that also includes skates and rays.
"All populations are therefore within reach of human fisheries, and there is no hidden reserve of chondrichthyan biomass or biodiversity in the deep sea.  Sharks may be more vulnerable to over-exploitation than previously thought."
Endangered or facing extinction
Of the 490 species of shark, 25 are endangered or facing extinction, according to the Red List of threatened biodiversity compiled by the World Conservation Union (IUCN). 
But this number is set to grow, in the light of new data assessed by the IUCN's group of shark experts, the Swiss-based agency says. 
Many shark species are very slow-growing, which means that a sudden drop in numbers can threaten their survival. 
Shark species have been ravaged by commercial trawling. They are scooped up accidentally as bycatch by trawlers hunting more lucrative fish, and are also being increasingly targeted for their fins, which are used for the Chinese  shark-fin soup, and for their liver, which is rich in oil. 
Some species of chondrichthyan fish have adapted to the extreme pressures and poor light of the deep ocean. 
The shark, though, seems to be excluded from life in the abysses because of a lack of food down there and the relatively high buoyancy of its liver, says the paper, by Professor Imants Priede of Scotland's University of Aberdeen.

Genes that govern aspects of social communication, human bonding and spirituality help to determine whether you'll make a good dancer, research suggests
Professional dancers are born with at least two special genes that give them a leg up on the rest of us, according to a new study.
Recent research also has suggested that intelligence, athletic ability and musical talent are linked to our genes and brain hard-wiring. 
With dancing added to the list, the evidence indicates that certain individuals are born with a predisposition to specific behaviours and talents, and that at least some of these qualities may represent evolved attributes. 
"I think that dancing is an evolved trait," says Professor Richard Ebstein, who led the study, published in a recent issue of the PLoS Genetics journal.
"Animals have courtship dances and I think that human dancing represents the further development of a very ancient animal trait," says Ebstein, a psychology professor at Hebrew University's Scheinfeld Center for Genetic Studies.
"Also the fact that dancing is universal and existed in all human societies, even those communities of man separated geographically by tens of thousands of years [Aboriginal Australians, native Americans, Africans, Eurasians] attests to the very early origin of dance in our evolution as a species."
First, find your dancers
Ebstein, doctoral student Rachel Bachner-Melman and their colleagues examined the DNA of 85 currently performing dancers and their parents.
They then did the same thing for 91 competitive athletes and 872 people who neither regularly dance nor often participate in sports. 
The scientists discovered that dancers tend to possess variants of two genes that are involved in the transmission of information between nerve cells. 
One of the identified genes is a transporter of serotonin, a brain transmitter that contributes to spiritual experience.
The second is a receptor of the hormone vasopressin, which many studies suggest modulates social communication and human bonding. 
"People are born to dance," says Ebstein. "They have [other] genes that partially contribute to musical talent, such as coordination, sense of rhythm. However, the genes we studied are more related to the emotional side of dancing - the need and ability to communicate with other people and a spiritual side to their natures that not only enable them to feel the music, but to communicate that feeling to others via dance." 
Ebstein believes some adults may possess the special gene variants, but they perhaps never nurtured the related skills or recognised their hidden talent. 
"Many of us surely have the ability, but for a hundred reasons never exploited that particular talent," he says.
Ebstein explained that the identified genes seem to be linked to every form of dancing, from tap to hula, since all usually involve social communication and connecting to music or rhythms.
Other factors to consider
Professor Irving Gottesman, a senior fellow in psychology at the University of Minnesota and an emeritus professor from the University of Virginia, is one of the world's leading experts on genes as they relate to human behaviour and psychology. 
Gottesman emphasises previous research has shown that genes are only one part of "complex causality" systems that make us who we are.
For example, he confirms that intelligence can be in our genes, but that socioeconomic considerations, such as a quality education, can have a greater influence on a person's intellect. 
Ebstein agrees that genes are not the whole story. He says those of us without a twinkle-toed predisposition can still become good dancers, since "it's not only a question of having the right genes, but also training and motivation, that make professional dancers".

Scientists have been inspired by the path of a free-falling ball to work out a crucial step in quantum computing
What can a quantum computer do? The answer is as simple as watching a ball free-falling under gravity, say Australian physicists.
They say the maths that describes a falling ball can be used to identify algorithms for quantum computers to work on.
Mark Dowling and colleagues at the University of Queensland report their argument in today's issue of the journal Science.
Some problems, like finding the factors of very large numbers, are beyond the capability of normal computers, says Dowling.
"A simple example would be 15. The factors are 3 and 5," he says. "But if I give you 256 billion nine hundred and whatever and ask you what numbers multiply to give that, that's a hard problem."
In general, a standard computer will require 10^n steps to find the factors of a number with 'n' digits.
This means that as a number gets bigger, the number of steps in the algorithm used to solve the problem increases exponentially and it becomes unfeasible to calculate.
But it is expected that quantum computers will be able to solve such problems more easily, using algorithms that do not have an exponential increase in steps as the number increases.
Quantum computers are only in their infancy right now, which is why internet commerce can rely on encryption codes based on factoring very large numbers to secure credit card details.
But as quantum computers mature, not only will this present a challenge for those involved in internet security, researchers will also want to put these powerful computers to more useful work than cracking codes.
Scientists have been looking for problems, like factoring, which would be suitable for a quantum computer to solve. But so far it's been a difficult task.
Now the Queensland researchers have found a surprising way of identifying quantum computer algorithms.
Geometric inspiration
Dowling and colleagues were inspired by the field of mathematics called Riemannian geometry, which helps to find the shortest path between two points in a curved space.
Picture a ball at the top of a hill in a hilly landscape about to travel from A to B.
The quickest path would be for the ball to fall freely from A under gravity, working its way down the hill to B.
Now imagine the hills are like steps in an algorithm. The bigger the hill, the more steps.
There may be many possible algorithms that solve a problem, or paths to get from A to B. But the ones with the least number of steps are equivalent to the path taken by the free-falling ball.
The researchers have found that the maths that describes the path of the free-falling ball can be used to identify algorithms suitable for quantum computer problems.
"It's a new route to finding problems that a quantum computer can do easily," says Dowling.
He says there are many problems that standard computers cannot solve and that may be candidates for quantum computing.
One such problem is the 'travelling salesman problem', which identifies the shortest route for someone visiting a large number of locations.

Pluto is in the centre and Charon is just below it. The new moons, P1 and P2, are to the right of Pluto and Charon
The tiny, distant and frozen planet Pluto, for 30 years believed to have just one moon, has two more satellites, US astronomers confirm.
They tentatively announced the discovery of the two moons last November.
Now they've confirmed their find, after spending six months analysing images from the Hubble Space Telescope and publishing their work in today's issue of the journal Nature.
Pluto's first known satellite Charon was not discovered until 1978. With a diameter of 1200 kilometres, it is half that of Pluto, abnormally large for a moon in relation to its planet.
Some scientists suspected Pluto had other, tiny moons. But at such a great distance from Earth, they have been hard to spot.
The two additional orbiting satellites, P1 and P2, are travelling outside the orbit of Charon and are tiny by comparison, say scientists led by Dr Hal Weaver of Johns Hopkins University.
P1, the more distant of the two from Pluto, has a diameter of between 60 and 165 kilometres while P2 is 20% smaller. 
"Although definitive orbits cannot be derived, both new satellites appear to be moving in circular orbits in the same orbital plane as Charon with orbital periods of about 38 days for P1 and 25 days for P2," they write. 
Charon's density is also very similar to that of Pluto's, which appears to back theories that the planet whacked into a large space object, causing a large chunk to break off and eventually be enslaved as a satellite. 
P1 and P2 may have resulted from the same collision, says Dr Alan Stern of the Southwest Research Institute in the same issue of Nature.
First with multiple satellites
The discovery of the two new members of Pluto's family make it the only object in the Kuiper belt, a vast region of rock and ice beyond Neptune that contains debris from the formation of the solar system, known to have multiple satellites, the scientists say.
The scientists also expect Pluto's small moons to generate debris rings of their own, from surface impacts.
"[This] would open up a whole new class of study because it would constitute the first ring system seen around a solid body rather than a gas giant planet," says Stern's colleague and co-author Dr Bill Merline.
Pluto was only discovered in 1930 and because of its vast distance from Earth has remained largely enigmatic ever since. 
It's some three billion miles from the Sun and the only planet not yet to have been visited by a spacecraft.
NASA's New Horizons mission, which was launched earlier this year, will be the first to take a detailed look at Pluto, in 2015, and the Kuiper belt by 2020.

Japanese people traditionally eat eel on the hottest days of summer to combat the heat. Seen here, restaurant owners inspecting their stock ahead of national Eel Day
An ancient mystery surrounding the Japanese eel, a species as prized by fishermen for its high price as it is by chefs for its delicate flesh, has been explained at last. 
Like its Atlantic cousins, the Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) matures in freshwater but then migrates out to sea to spawn.
But where this act is carried out has, until now, been an enigma.
The answer, says a Japanese ocean researcher today in the journal Nature, lies in a tiny triangle of the Pacific Ocean about 2000 kilometres east of the Philippines, near underwater mountains west of the Mariana Islands.
There male and female eels gather in the waning moonlight in the middle of the year, luxuriating in the balmy tropical waters. 
University of Tokyo scientist Professor Katsumi Tsukamoto collected newly-hatched eels during a research trip aboard an oceanographic vessel, the Hakuho Maru, last year. 
The creatures were still in a microscopic larval state and could only be identified with a DNA test.
The scientist pinpointed their spawning site as 14&deg; north, 142&deg; east, to the west of the Suruga seamount in the southern part of the West Mariana Ridge.
The eels had hatched about four days before the new moon of June 2005. 
Just the spot
The site is cleverly chosen, because it enables the hatchlings to be carried northwestward on the Kuroshio Current, which flows towards the coastline of China and Japan where the eels mature in rivers and lakes. 
If the spawning were to occur only a little bit further south, the infant eels could get swept up in the Mindanao Current, which runs southwards down the eastern side of the Philippine archipelago. 
The love grounds of the Japanese eel are tiny when compared to those of its two Atlantic relatives, the European and American eels (A. anguilla) and (A. rostrata), which reproduce in the Sargasso Sea in the eastern Caribbean.
Grilled, steamed, grilled or baked, the eel is a delicacy in Japan, where it is known as unagi. 
Most eels sold for food come from aquaculture. But these eels come from wild eels that are caught and put in fish farms to mature in captivity. 
A surge in demand
