What a shocker of a hairdo! But would you blurt this out in front of her?
Older people accused of being 'blunt' can blame their deteriorating brain for their straight talking, an Australian researcher suggests.
Associate Professor Bill von Hippel, a psychologist at the University of New South Wales, says this deterioration means the brain can't properly inhibit older people from saying inappropriate things.
"Older adults tend to be more likely to ask about private or personal issues in public than younger adults are," says von Hippel. 
"And we have suggestive evidence that this is brought about by declines in frontal lobe functioning."
He was recently awarded an Australian Research Council grant to investigate the theory and the implications for older people's health.
Von Hippel says the stereotype is that people over the age of 65 are more likely to speak their mind because they have earned the right to, and because they are often seen as a source of wisdom.
But he says they can lose friends as it can be socially inappropriate.
"If I'm asking you about your haemorrhoids in public, even if I don't mean to be mean by doing it, I'm nevertheless humiliating you and I'm not providing you with positive emotional support," he says.
And this can be a health issue, says von Hippel, because losing friends can lead to loneliness, which is bad for both mental and physical health, especially in older people.
Experiments
In recent experiments, von Hippel interviewed 80 people from several groups of older and younger adults about the likelihood that other members of the group were likely to say certain inappropriate things.
He found that older people were more likely to ask in public if someone had put on weight, about their haemorrhoids, or whether they were still having problems with their partner.
He then tested how well the same people inhibited themselves, an ability controlled by the frontal lobes, by answering trick trivia questions.
For example, they were asked 'What colour are tigers' spots?'
He found that younger people were more likely to restrain themselves from answering the trick question, whereas older people were more likely to blurt out 'black' and then realise it was a trick.
Von Hippel says evidence from these two experiments shows that the same older people, who were more likely to be blunt, have lower inhibitory power in their frontal lobes.
Future studies
Von Hippel would now like to do similar tests on a larger number of people using magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, to check if atrophy in the frontal lobes correlates with bluntness in older adults.
For now, he can not rule out other causes for the bluntness, such as early stage dementia.
But he says the frontal lobe theory is supported by other research showing the people with frontal lobe brain damage are often more socially inappropriate.
An uncomfortable idea?
But von Hippel says his work has been criticised.
"I think it's perceived as an attack on older adults," he says. "I don't believe it is."
He says it is already accepted that atrophy of the frontal lobes occurs as you age and this affects memory and slows down brain processing. 
"What our research is showing is that there are social consequences as well."

As water falls on the jacket you get a pattern of lights that looks like water falling
A coat that glows when it rains has been created by a US-based designer.
Elise Co, of design and technology firm Aeolab in Los Angeles, will be discussing the latest version of her Puddlejumper coat at a textiles show in France this month.
Puddlejumper is a luminescent, nylon raincoat that turns the prospect of walking in the rain into an opportunity for play and performance, says Co, a former professor of new media.
It's coated with PVC and has water sensors on its back and left sleeve.
The sensors are wired via interior electronics to electroluminescent panels on the front of the jacket.
When water hits one of the sensors, the corresponding lamp lights up on the front, creating a flickering pattern of illumination that mirrors the rhythm of rainfall, says Co.
"You get a pattern of lights that really looks like water falling," she says.
Co says the electroluminescent panels are of the same kind of material used as backlighting for phones. 
The material is usually purchased pre-manufactured as plastic sheets that are cut up and wired together.
But Co mixed up the chemicals that make the panels and silk-screened them onto the jacket by hand, and hand printed the water sensors onto the jacket.
Co will help facilitate a workshop on wearable technology in Canberra next year called reSkin, where she will discuss her work.
"Although technology has the bad rap of being dry or technical, at the very least, intimidating, it is great to illuminate how creative a process it is, and how doable," she says.
"I especially like the mixture of wearable plus technology because clothing and accessories on the body are so expressive and design oriented, not only visually but also in terms of materiality and usability and wearability."
Co says her raincoats are still prototypes but the fact they are made of industrial materials mean they could be developed further.
"There is no reason why they couldn't be made durable enough to be worn normally," she says.
"It would be a matter of doing tests and tweaking the construction process to make sure they're protected well."

Caffeine is more likely to disrupt a daytime snooze than a normal night's sleep
Shiftworkers or people with jet lag who drink coffee to keep themselves awake may not be able to catnap the next day, say Canadian researchers.
They report online in the journal Neuropsychopharmacology that caffeine has a stronger disruptive effect on daytime, catch-up sleep after a night of sleep deprivation than it does on a normal night's sleep.
"Recent studies have suggested that caffeine is a measure of choice to counteract the effects of sleep deprivation on alertness and performance," say Dr Julie Carrier of Montreal's Sacred Heart Hospital and colleagues. 
"Our results suggest that this recommendation should be made with caution since using caffeine before sleeping at an abnormal circadian phase, such as during night work, might have more adverse consequences on sleep quality than before sleeping at a normal circadian time." 
Drinking caffeine at night is known to make it more difficult to fall asleep and to worsen sleep quality, Carrier and her team note.
They hypothesised that caffeine would have an even stronger effect when people were trying to recover from sleep deprivation by snoozing during the day.
To investigate, they asked 34 people drink caffeine or placebo before going to sleep at their normal bedtime.
A month later, the same people were deprived of sleep for an entire night. They were then told to fall asleep an hour after their normal wake-up time, after being given placebo or caffeine.
People received 100 milligrams of caffeine or placebo before their scheduled morning or evening bedtime, and then another 100 milligrams (or placebo) one hour before.
Sleeping after caffeine
All study participants who took caffeine took longer to fall asleep and spent more time in lighter stage 1 sleep and less time in deeper stage 2 and slow-wave sleep, the researchers found.
But people given caffeine before daytime sleep took even longer to drop off, and also slept for a shorter total time and had less REM sleep. Caffeine didn't affect night time sleep duration or REM. 
Carrier and her colleagues suggest that the greater daytime effects of caffeine are due to the fact that people are trying to fall asleep at a time when their body clock is telling them to stay awake, even though they are sleep-deprived.
Slow-wave sleep is known to last longer during daytime, catch-up sleep, they add, which normally helps override this circadian signal.
Given that caffeine reduces slow-wave sleep, it appears to allow the wake-up call to remain strong.

The site where this hand and forearm stencil was found is 4000-5000 years old
Fieldwork in what's believed to be one of the most significant rock art sites in Australia has stalled after the federal government declined to fund further research, archaeologists say.
Over the weekend scientists exploring the Wollemi National Park northwest of Sydney announced the discovery of numerous shelters, many with rock drawings and stencils up to 5000 years old.
They also discovered what's believed to be the first hafted stone axe found in southeastern Australia, estimated to be around 150 years old.
But now the archaeologists are being forced to look for international funding to continue their work and can't even afford a day trip to the remote area to protect vulnerable sites from damage by bushfires, says team co-leader Professor Paul Taçon of Griffith University.
The largest and most significant site, an engraved platform a few kilometres from where the axe was found, is at immediate risk, Taçon says.
The platform features large eagle and koala figures and images of what are believed to be ancestral beings.
"There is a lot of vegetation around the edge of the platform and fallen tree limbs which will provide fuel [for bushfires]," he says.
"If we get a really hot one in the next few months there is a risk that some of the engravings we've discovered won't be there any more.
"Ideally it would be good to ... just go in to clear it up but at the moment we don't have any funding to do anything at all."
Taçon says the Australian Research Council informed him last week that his grant application, worth several hundred thousand dollars a year over the next five years, had been knocked back in favour of international projects.
"The application was for further work in the Wollemi and other parts of the country on rock art," he says.
"It looks like no rock art projects will be getting up, and hardly any Australian archaeology projects at all. Most of the money went for people working on archaeological projects overseas."
He says the latest trip and previous surveys of the Wollemi bushland, where the Jurassic-era Wollemi pine was also discovered, have been funded by team members and international organisations.
The researchers are currently talking to a New Zealand company for funding to help them return for more surveying in April.
"Given what we've found on each trip there's probably lots more out there," he says. 
An Australian Research Council spokesperson could not comment on individual funding applications, but confirms some applications for international archaeological projects were successful in the last round.
"Yes, we did fund a number of archaeological projects ... and several involved research overseas," she says.
"But it is all by researchers who reside predominantly in Australia."
The future of the axe
Meanwhile the future of the axe, which still has traces of resin most likely made from plants and beeswax, remains up in the air.
Taçon says it will either remain undisturbed in the cave where it was found or be moved to the Australian Museum in Sydney for public display.
"Perhaps it can remain and eventually turn to dust," he says.
"Sometimes removing objects destroys the context and connection to the larger landscape and history of a particular area."
But a final decision about whether the axe should stay or go will be made by local Aboriginal groups, he says.
Dave Pross, from the Darkinjung Local Aboriginal Land Council, wants to see the axe in a museum to prevent it being picked up by bushwalkers and ending up on an online auction site like many other Aboriginal artefacts.
 He'll argue for this at the next land council meeting.
"My view is to get it out and put it into a museum because bushwalkers can come in, find something and put it on eBay," he says.
"Let's put these things in a museum, as long as they can be used for a display, or showed to students, and they'll be safe."

Horned beetles can have big weapons or big testes, not both
Beetles with the biggest horns have the smallest testes, say scientists who show that in evolutionary terms you can't have it all.
They say their finding is clear evidence of an evolutionary trade-off between the ability to fight off sexual competitors and reproductive potency. 
Or put simply, the ability to find a mate and the ability to fertilise her.
Professor Leigh Simmons of the University of Western Australia and US researcher Professor Douglas Emlen of the University of Montana publish their findings online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The researchers looked at beetles of the genus Onthophagus, dung beetles known for the size and variety of their horns.
"What we did was test a fundamental assumption underlying evolution ... that males face a trade-off between competing for access to lots of females and investment in gaining fertilisation with those females," Simmons says.
"They need to have big horns to win fights and get females and they need to have big testes in order to win in sperm competition.
"But they can't do both, so species which invest very heavily in their horns tend to invest less in their testes."
The study also demonstrates the theory of sperm competition, which occurs when females mate with more than one partner, Simmons says.
According to this theory, male rivalry continues after a mate has been found as sperm from different males compete to fertilise an egg.
"Theory predicts that males should increase their investment in sperm production as sperm competition in increased," he says.
Manipulating horns
Simmons tested the theory by cauterising the area of the developing beetle pupa, where the horns would grow, destroying cells and preventing horn growth.
He found that if horn development was inhibited, the pupa compensated by developing larger testes.
The principle is known as a resource allocation trade-off, he says.
"They got a fixed amount of resources to allocate to various structures, to their legs, their wings, their horns and to their testes and other important organs," he says.
"If [the developing beetle] doesn't produce horns those males then produce bigger testes because they have resources that weren't used for horn growth."
Other examples
Simmons says the principle of resource allocation has been demonstrated in other animal studies.
For example, there is some evidence that bats trade the size of their testes for brain power.
And a recent study showed that stalk-eyed flies, in which eye span width is a measure of sexual desirability, trade testes size for the width of their eyes.
"There have been suggestions of a trade-off between gaining mates and gaining fertilisation but our study is probably one of the most conclusive studies to date to have demonstrated this," Simmons says.

The new element 118 travels through the accelerator to the detector
Scientists say they have discovered a superheavy element, known as 118, albeit one that has only lasted a fraction of a second over months of experiments.
Scientists at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California and Russia's Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna expect the new element to be a noble gas that lies below radon in the periodic table.
They publish their results in the journal Physical Review C.
Scientists discovered the last naturally occurring element on the periodic table in 1925 but have since tried to create new heavier elements. 
In the latest experiments, the scientists bombarded the element californium with 10^19 calcium ions to create two atoms of element 118.
The atoms of element 118, also known as ununoctium, lasted 0.9 milliseconds, they say.
The team then observed the element decay to element 116, then to 114.
This makes it the fifth new element for the collaborating scientists (113, 114, 115, 116 and now 118).
An announcement in 2002 from researchers at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California claiming they had found element 118 was later shown to have been a fraud. 
"We selected a completely different nuclear reaction, performed with completely different people in a different laboratory," says Dr Ken Moody, the Livermore team leader.
"Everything we do is checked and double checked.
"The data analysis is performed by both us and our Russian colleagues. We do everything that we can possibility do to both avoid the possibility of intentional fraud and of mistaken handling of the data." 
The Livermore-Dubna team says it's now looking to create element 120, by bombarding plutonium with iron isotopes.
So it looks like high school and university science labs may still have to replace their periodic table posters yet again.

One day we might be filling our cars with biodiesel produced using genetically modified organisms
Genetically modified microorganisms could one day make it easier and cheaper to produce biofuels, experts say.
A symposium convened by the Australian Institute of Agricultural Science and Technology in Canberra this week will hear about future directions in biofuel technology and ways of meeting national biofuel targets.
Speaker Leo Hyde, research and development manager at DuPont Australia, says improving the yeasts and bacteria that turn raw biomass into fuel is a major step in reducing the use of fossil fuels.
Hyde says the company is developing bacteria specifically tailored to the production of butanol.
Like ethanol, butanol can be produced from the sugars contained in cellulose waste from crops like corn or sugar cane, and even logging waste.
"We have bugs now but they're not efficient enough," he says.
"What we're working on is another bug that we believe will be far more efficient than the current process [of producing butanol].
"You'd re-engineer it to make the butanol pathway more efficient. We'll modify pathways, how it uses energy, to improve the yield of the product you want."
What are the benefits?
Phillip Calais is a renewable energy consultant and former lecturer in environmental science at Murdoch University, where he's involved in a biofuels project.
He says there are benefits in using genetically modified or GM bugs in the fermentation of fuels like butanol, which he says is more "oil-like" than ethanol and mixes better with petrol, but is more difficult to produce.
Butane is made from a raw product that is then broken down to starch or sugars, fermented and purified.
"With butanol, fermentation has to be very pure. If there are any weird strains of bacteria it really upsets the fermentation process," he says.
The bugs that are currently used are also destroyed once butanol reaches a certain concentration, which means more costly and time consuming processing is needed to purify it after fermentation.
"By using GM you can actually breed up different bugs that can survive a higher concentration of purity in the butanol," Calais says.
"If you can make it more concentrated in the first place by using better bugs you can do less processing later."
What about the risks?
The use of GM organisms holds promise for "certain niches", says Adrian Lake founder and president of the Biodiesel Association of Australia.
But he says the technology is still being developed and has potential risks.
"There's potential danger in changing any bugs," he says.
"If it's an organism that's extremely aggressive and has to be highly controlled because it will replicate and damage other organisms, that's a concern."

'Fred the Thread', a caterpillar that lives in the stem of a New Zealand wetland plant
'Fred the Thread' is vying for a place in the record books as the world's thinnest caterpillar, its discoverers say.
The New Zealand caterpillar is barely 0.9 millimetres wide and is the larval stage of an entirely new genus and species of moth Houdinia flexilissima.
But scientists at Landcare Research, who discovered Fred, are concerned about his survival.
This is because he lives in the cane rush Sporadanthus ferrugineus, a threatened wetland plant that forms peat.
The researchers publish details of Fred in the latest issue of the journal Invertebrate Systematics.
Invertebrate ecologist Dr Corinne Watts was researching the restoration of areas mined for peat at Torehape on New Zealand's North Island. And she was intrigued by star-shaped tunnels in the plant stems.
"It was obvious that something was making them. But every time I cut open a stem there was nothing inside," she says.
"At the time the caterpillars were so tiny that I kept missing them. It wasn't until they grew bigger that I finally saw a bright orange thread and thought 'gotcha'." 
Taxonomist Dr Robert Hoare used an electron microscope to measure the caterpillar which, although thin, grows to a respectable few centimetres long. 
"Sporadanthus stems are very narrow so to live inside them the caterpillar has to get longer rather than fatter," says Watts. 
Finding the tiny adult moths, only half a centimetre long, proved almost as difficult.
That was until, using a technique borne of frustration, the scientists learnt that kicking the plants elicited a cloud of them. 
The moths are active at dusk and survive for a brief breeding period of four to six weeks between October and November.
Although the entire life cycle is not yet fully understood, it is clear that over two or three years the caterpillar goes through the usual stages of moulting, pupating and metamorphosing into a most unusual moth, all within the confines of a 5 millimetre wide stem.
Such a feat, as well as the remarkable way the species has managed to elude detection for so long, prompted the new genus to be named after the renowned escapologist Harry Houdini. 
Fred the Thread's host plant is found in one of three remaining peat bogs on the North Island, the researchers say.
Over the years, drainage and conversion of peat bogs to pasture has resulted in habitat loss, leading for calls to put the plant on the endangered list and to reappraise the conservation status of the moth.

It could take centuries, not decades, to melt the dense ice packs that accumulate and creep down the Himalayas, says a scientist
Glaciers in the Himalayas have not drastically shrunk despite climate change and are unlikely to melt away in coming decades, a Chinese scientist says.
Professor Zhang Wenjing, glacier expert at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, discounted previous forecasts that glaciers across western China could disappear in decades or the Himalayan glaciers could melt away in 50 years, reports the Xinhua news agency.
"Those predictions may be excessively pessimistic," he says. "So far glaciers in the middle and eastern part of the Himalayas have not shrunk on any large scale."
Zhang does not question climate change, but says it would take perhaps centuries to melt the dense ice packs that accumulate and creep down the Himalayas.
"The glaciers in the region are melting comparatively slowly," says Zhang, who is taking part in an international expedition to study the mountains. 
Zhang's comments appear to clash with the conclusions of many other scientists and conservationists that many parts of the Asian mountain chain are likely to experience severe melting as global temperatures rise in coming decades.
In the past 40 years, glaciers across the Tibetan plateau that spills from China into South Asia have shrunk by 6600 square kilometres, especially since the 1980s, the conservation group WWF says in a 2005 report.
The glaciers now cover about 105,000 square kilometres, it says. 
A report on climate change organised by Chinese government agencies says last year that considerable uncertainty surrounds the effects of rising average temperatures on glaciers in different regions.
But the report forecast that "by 2050 glaciers in China's west will have dramatically shrunk".

Scientists have fired lasers at cells to make them vibrate, then picked up the characteristic sound of melanoma cells in the blood
Doctors looking to see if cancer has spread may be able to one day simply listen for it, US researchers report. 
Researchers at the University of Missouri-Columbia say they have used a technique called photoacoustic detection to pick up the characteristic vibrations of melanoma cells in the blood.
They say their method could let oncologists spot as few as 10 cancer cells in a blood sample, catching a tumour's spread before it can settle into another organ.
Writing in the October issue of the journal Optics Letters, the researchers say they combined laser techniques from the field of optics and ultrasound techniques from acoustics.
They used a laser to make cells vibrate and then picked up the characteristic sound of melanoma cells.
The researchers say they were able to detect melanoma cells obtained from actual patients.
The dark, microscopic granules of melanin in the melanoma cancer cells absorb the energy bursts from the blue laser light.
As the melanoma cells expand and contract, they generate crackling sounds that can be picked them up with special microphones and analysed by computer. 
Other human cells do not contain pigments with the same colour as melanin, so the melanin signature is easy to tell apart from other noises, says Assistant Professor John Viator, a biomedical engineer who worked on the study. 
"The only reason there could be melanin in the human blood is that there would be melanoma cells," he says. 
A blood screening test could reassure patients who have a growth removed, or tell a doctor to start chemotherapy quickly because the cancer has already started to spread. 
"It could take just 30 minutes to find out if there are any circulating cancer cells," Viator says. 
Because of melanin, melanoma is the only type of cancer that can be detected in this way.
But the researchers say they could try using artificial materials to act as light absorbers and as noise makers.
"We're looking for methods to attach other kinds of absorbers to cancer cells," Viator says.

The fish skull emerging from the rock it was found in
Fish developed features characteristic of land animals much earlier than once thought, say researchers.
Dr John Long of Museum Victoria and colleagues base their conclusions on an uncrushed 380 million-year-old fish fossil found in Western Australia.
"The specimen is the most perfect complete three-dimensional fish of its kind ever discovered in the whole world," says Long, who reports the team's findings online today in the journal Nature.
"It looks like it died yesterday. You can still open and close the mouth."
Long says the preserved remains of a Gogonasus fish from the Devonian period were found last year in the remote Kimberley area at the Gogo fossil site, once an 'ancient barrier reef' teeming with fish.
Previous analyses based on limited material suggested Gogonasus had relatively primitive features, says Long.
But when his team used a CT scanner at the Australian National University to analyse this new fossil, it found the fish had a number of features common to land animals.
"It's hiding a lot of deceptively advanced features that were not recognised before until we had such a perfect specimen," says Long.
For example, Gogonasus had hole in its skull similar to that found in the first land animals, he says.
This hole eventually became the Eustachian tube in higher vertebrates, says Long.
His team's analysis also revealed the fish's pectoral fin had the same pattern of bones as the forelimbs or arms of land animals, called tetrapods.
"It's definitely a fish. It's got gills, it swims in water, it's got fins," says Long. "But it's a fish that is showing the beginnings of the tetrapod's advanced body plan that would eventually carry on to all living land animals."
Gogonasus also had a cheek bone structure similar to early amphibian and a single pair of nostrils, like we have, says Long.
Wolf in sheep's clothing
Earlier this year scientists reported the discovery of Tiktaalik roseae, a 375 million-year-old species of fish that filled the evolutionary gap in the transition between water and land animals.
While Tiktaalik had a skull that was identical to an amphibian, Gogonasus looks much more like a fish, says Long.
"This particular fish is a bit like a wolf in sheep's clothing," he says.

This image of the lunar south pole, together with radar echoes, was thought to be evidence for ice. Now scientists say it isn't ice, just rough terrain
Hopes that the Moon's south pole has a vast hoard of ice that could be used to establish a lunar colony are sadly unfounded, a new study says. 
In 1994, radar echoes sent back in an experiment involving a US orbiter called Clementine appeared to show a treasure trove of frozen water below craters near the lunar south pole.
At the time, scientists saw this as evidence of ice in areas that were permanently shaded from the Sun.
If so, such a find would be an invaluable boost to colonisation, as the ice could be used to provide water as well as hydrogen as fuel.
NASA is looking closely at the south pole as a potential site for the US return mission to the Moon, scheduled to take place by 2020.
But a paper published today in the journal Nature says the Clementine data was most probably misinterpreted.
Professor Donald Campbell of Cornell University and colleagues, including Dr Nicholas Stacy from Australia's Defence Science and Technology Organisation, collected radar images of the Moon's south pole to a resolution of 20 metres.
They looked especially at Shackleton crater, which had generated most interest.
The team found that a particular radar signature called the circular polarisation ratio, which in the Clementine experiment was taken to indicate thick deposits of ice, could also be created by echoes from the rough terrain and walls of impact craters. 
The signature was found in both sunny and permanently shady areas of crater, which suggests that the reflection comes from rocky debris, not thick ice deposits.
If there is any ice at the south pole, it probably comes from tiny, scattered grains that probably account for only 1-2% of the local dust, the authors suggest.
"Any planning for future exploitation of hydrogen at the Moon's south pole should be constrained by this low average abundance rather than by the expectation of localised deposits at higher concentrations," the paper says.
The research involved sending a radar signal from the Arecibo telescope in Puerto Rico.
The signal hit the southern lunar region and the reflection was picked up by the US Green Bank Telescope.

The latest study on the best time of year to shear sheep overturns 20 years of thinking
Farmers who want to produce better quality wool don't necessarily need to shear their sheep in autumn, Australian researchers have found.
Angus Campbell, a PhD student from the University of Melbourne, and colleagues show that there's no particular shearing season that consistently improves wool strength.
That finding could have important implications for Australia's multi-billion dollar wool industry.
For the past 20 years or so, many farmers have sheared their sheep in autumn in the hope of getting better quality fibres and a higher price for their wool.
"The idea behind this is that wool gets thinner in summer and then thickens in late autumn," Campbell says.
This would make the wool stronger because it would be thin on the end but thicker and stronger in the middle.
To test this theory, Campbell and his colleagues designed a study that used real life conditions on two commercial Merino farms west of Geelong in Victoria.
Each year for five years, they sheared 1000 ewes and lambs in three different seasons and measured the quality of the wool.
One-third of the sheep were shorn in December, one-third in March and another third in May.
"These were three realistic shearing times based on other research and talking to wool growers," he says.
The result? "The wool strength from those three shearing times was the same," Campbell says.
The connection between wool fibre thickness and season has more to do with nutrition than weather, the researcher explains.
In summer the fibres tend to get thinner as the flocks rely more on dried feed, while the rains of autumn bring protein-rich green grass, which makes the wool quickly get thicker.
But in spring, when many farmers have their sheep bearing lambs, a similar thing happens because the ewes devote all their energy into growing the lamb, and not into the wool.
"This all means that among ewes and lambs no annual shearing time is going to consistently shear through the weak part of the fibre," Campbell says.
In a way, the results are good news for farmers, he says.
"It means that if a farmer has a really good reason for choosing a shearing time based on something specific to the farm, then I reckon they can go ahead and do it and not worry about it harming their wool value," he says.
Campbell's research will form part of his PhD, which is to be submitted later this year.

It's how you see things. Throughout the ages, scientists have been quick to judge scientists whose work doesn't fit their view of the world
Scientists may say they are dispassionate defenders of the unfettered pursuit of truth. But history suggests they are often guilty of being irrational and narrow-minded, says an Australian philosopher.
Emeritus Professor Miles Little of the University of Sydney argues his case in the current issue of the journal Medical Humanities.
"Science is supposed to be the ultimate in rationality. It's supposed to be the ultimate in evidence and the assessment of evidence," says Little, a former surgeon now at the university's Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in Medicine.
"But science doesn't behave like this in the face of aberrant science."
Aberrant science can involve the use of methods or the arrival at conclusions the majority don't agree with and is often shunned as if it was fraudulent, he says.
And yet, says Little, some aberrant science is by honest hardworking scientists who produce very important results.
While fraud is clearly an undesirable form of aberrant science, Little says those whose only crime is to use unusual methods or reach unusual conclusions should not be treated with the same contempt.
Instead, he says, they should be greeted with open-mindedness, a feature that is supposed to be the hallmark of good science.
Little says an example of such unfairly treated aberrant science is something that challenges the current scientific paradigm, the given set of assumptions about how the world works.
An example of this is the claim, made by immunologist Dr Jacques Benveniste in the late 1980s.
He said a solution of antibodies so dilute they were unlikely to contain any molecules could activate white blood cells, a claim could be used to support the claims of homoeopathy.
Little says the scientific community's immediate response to what they saw as "dysfunctional science" was to attack Benveniste personally and to vilify and humiliate him.
"The way the judgement was made was not scientific," says Little.
While subsequent attempts failed to reproduce Benveniste's results, Little says the outcome of other cases of aberrant science have been eventually accepted. 
One example is Professor Joseph Lister who argued against the wisdom of the 19th century that pus was a sign of infection by germs, which should be prevented from entering wounds.
"The majority of surgeons rejected it out of hand," says Little.
Lister was seen as a "young whippersnapper, defying well-established tradition, flying in the face of authority" and it took the next generation of surgeons to accept his views.
Little says a related category of unfairly treated aberrant science is something that challenges the accepted ideology of the day. 

Scientists have made an invisibility cloak that works with microwaves. But there are many technical challenges before a cloak could work with visible light to make someone invisible
Scientists say they have found a way to hide an object from microwave radiation in a first step towards making what they hope will be an invisibility cloak.
The cloaking device is said to deflect microwaves so they flow around a 'hidden' object inside it with little distortion, making it seem as if there was almost nothing there.
Such a device could one day be used to elude radar or in wireless communications.
But the researchers, like many scientists, are not working with any particular goal in mind but hope its uses will become apparent later.
"It's not quite Harry Potter," says Professor David Smith of Duke University in North Carolina, referring to the child's fictional character who can conceal himself in a magical cloak. 
"It's not exactly perfect; we can do better. But it demonstrates the mechanism, the way the waves swirl around the centre region where you want to conceal things," says Smith, who publishes the results online today in the journal Science.
Building a cloak
Every solid object scatters radiation that hits it, from microwaves through to visible light. It is this scattering that allows objects to be seen, whether with the eye or using radar or ultrasound. 
The cloaking device manipulates this scattering effect.
It relies on new, laboratory-made materials called metamaterials, engineered composite materials whose properties can be manipulated by tweaking their structure.
For instance, metamaterials can decrease both the scattering caused by a solid object and the shadow it casts. 
In this case the cloak is quite thick, Smith says, twice as big as the 15 centimetre copper tube it hides. And the materials are arranged in concentric rings.
In May the same researchers reported their theory, and it took them just a few months to demonstrate it.
The cloak reduces both back scatter, or reflection of microwaves, and forward scatter, or shadows. 
Limitations
The cloak only works in 2D. But the researchers have already started work on a 3D version.
The cloak also only works with microwaves of a specific wavelength. And the researchers hope to broaden the range of wavelengths that it can block.
But making something invisible to the human eye would present a much greater challenge.
Such a cloak would have to simultaneously interact with all the wavelengths that make up light.
"It is very unlikely that we could do it with this technology in the visible [spectrum]," Smith says.
It would have to be scaled down to nanotechnology levels, but the metals involved behave differently on that scale, he says. 
Eluding radar
Microwave cloaks might be useful for eluding radar, says Professor Costas Soukoulis, a theorist with the US Department of Energy's Ames Laboratory in Iowa.
"This is very, very important that experiments have produced what theorists had predicted," Soukoulis told Science.
The researchers are funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the design is based on a theory proposed by Professor John Pendry of Imperial College London.

Brain damage can improve your artistic skills but can also make your paintings less 'emotional'. So does everyone have the potential to become the next Picasso?
Damage to a particular part of the brain can trigger artistic talent, US neurologists show.
When they looked at one particular artist whose frontal and temporal lobes of the brain had deteriorated, they found she had developed new artistic skills. 
The US researchers published their study into the artistic effects of frontotemporal lobar dementia in the latest issue of the journal Neurology.
There have been reports of previously inartistic people becoming talented visual artists after developing this condition.
But it is not clear whether the brain atrophy is releasing dormant talent, or the disease itself has somehow triggered the artistic expression. 
To investigate, Dr Valeria Drago of the University of Florida at Gainesville and others studied the art of a woman who had been an artist before developing this type of brain damage.
As the woman's condition worsened, they found, her artistic technique improved, but the emotional power of her work decreased.
"We can really follow how the paintings have been changed following the disease," says Drago. 
Drago and her team gathered 40 of the woman's paintings, including several from the period before she developed symptoms. Some were when her symptoms were beginning, and some were painted later. 
The researchers then gave 18 men and women training on how to evaluate six different artistic qualities, and asked them to rate the paintings.
Ratings for the paintings' artistic skill rose as the woman's disease progressed.
But ratings on the paintings' 'evocative impact' and 'closure' fell. 
Evocative impact is the ability of a work of art to elicit an emotional reaction, while closure is the sense that a painting is finished and complete. 
Drago and her team note that the condition leaves the parts of the brain at work in drawing, painting and other skills relatively intact.
The part of the brain the disease does affect may typically inhibit this region of the brain, so when it is damaged artistic talents have freer rein, they suggest. 
The researchers also point out that patients with this form of brain damage may have damage to the limbic system, a network within the brain essential for mediating emotions.
This damage could in turn impair an artist's ability to paint emotionally affecting paintings, or to portray emotion visually. 
Drago says she and her team are continuing to study creativity and the brain, and are currently looking at how normal ageing may change creativity.

Women who believe that men are better at maths do worse in maths tests than women who don't believe the stereotype
When women believe they are genetically bad at maths, the belief becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy, research shows.
The divide between men's and women's talent at maths may therefore be due to misinformation more than genetic destiny.
A report published in the latest issue of the journal Science shows that women exposed to theories saying females are genetically bad at maths perform far worse on maths tests than women who had not been exposed to such beliefs. 
Canadian psychologists Associate Professor Steven Heine and doctoral student Ilan Dar-Nimrod, from the University of British Columbia, studied how 220 female students performed in maths tests after reading fake research reports.
The psychologists had invented the reports, which contained bogus claims about men being better at maths.
One phoney paper claimed to have discovered that the male Y chromosome gives men a 5% edge over women in maths.
Another fake paper claimed that men have a 5% edge because maths teachers stereotype girl and boy students at a very young age.
Heine says the research clearly shows that women who read the fake report about genetics did much worse in the maths test. 
The research, he says, shows that people believe they can overcome stereotyping and continue to try.
But if they blame their genetic makeup and believe they have an innate lack of ability, they give up, he says.
"People think genes are at the core of who we are," he says. "But much genetics research is still unproved. Just raising the question about genes has harmful consequences."
Often, says Heine, science about research on genes affecting gender, obesity or homosexuality is "grossly simplified" in the media. 
"The reports themselves have the potential to undermine people's motivations. If I believe that genes have a deterministic influence on my weight, will I still struggle to keep up with my diet and exercise routine?
"Genetics research is a booming industry, and every week [scientists] are identifying a new gene," he says.
But genes work in complicated ways scientists don't yet understand, he warns, and "not all scientific theories are created equal".
So-called 'brain sex', genetic differences between men's and women's brains, is a controversial research subject. 
It's so contentious that earlier this year Professor Lawrence Summers resigned as president of Harvard University amid an uproar after he suggested that women have less intrinsic ability in maths and science than men.

Champion racehorse Phar Lap died more than 70 years ago. But a scientific test has sparked fresh debate about what caused his demise (Melbourne Museum)
Claims that champion Australian racehorse Phar Lap was killed by arsenic poisoning are premature, says an expert who has cast doubt on reports today that science has solved one of the nation's biggest sporting mysteries.
Professor Rob Lewis, director of the Monash University Centre for Synchrotron Science, says there are too many "ifs, whats and wherefores" to declare the case of Phar Lap's unexplained death shut.
Lewis, who has seen the results of synchrotron analysis of Phar Lap's hair conducted in the US, says the research is preliminary.
He says it's too early to tell whether arsenic detected in the hair is from a chemical used during the taxidermy process to preserve the horse, or the results of foul play.
Phar Lap, the 1930 Melbourne Cup champion and one of Australia's greatest sporting icons, died in 1932, shortly after winning America's richest race the Agua Caliente Handicap.
The exact cause of his death has never been proved although there was speculation it was the work of gangsters.
So Dr Ivan Kempson, a research fellow based at the University of South Australia, came up with the idea of using a synchrotron to analyse Phar Lap's hair.
"All of our analysis so far indicates that he most probably did consume a dose of arsenic just prior to his death," he says.
Kempson says analysis by the Advanced Photon Source synchrotron near Chicago shows two forms of arsenic. 
One of them, lead arsenide, could be associated with preservation, he says. But the other is more likely to be the result of ingestion.
"The other type of arsenic is consistent by its distribution and location and chemistry with him ingesting the arsenic between 30-40 hours prior to his death," he says.
"We've been going through a process of trying to prove ourselves wrong and look for alternative explanations but so far the results are consistent with him consuming arsenic." 
Horse hair samples
But Lewis says more work is needed to analyse samples from the stuffed horse, which is preserved for public display at the Melbourne Museum.
"Nobody's ever actually analysed hair from an animal that's been stuffed for this long," he says.
"What you really need to prove this kind of thing is 20 horses that were stuffed, and you check all of them and if you find a major problem in one of them you say that one's different. But in this case we've got one.
"And given that we don't actually understand exactly what procedure was used to preserve Phar Lap, how do we know whether the stuff was used in the preserving or whether it was given to him beforehand?"
Lewis says synchrotrons can closely analyse the structure of chemicals like arsenic.
"The synchrotron without any shadow of a doubt gives you more information than you could have got in other ways. But whether or not it's conclusive, would it stand up in a court of law, personally I have my doubts," he says.
"There are all sorts of things we don't quite know, we don't know the process that was used in tanning the hide, [we don't know] what has happened to the condition of that arsenic in the years since Phar Lap died. 
"Things oxidise, things change, bugs get in, all sorts of things change. Biological materials don't stay the same and clearly that sort of thing might have happened."
Kempson says more research is planned to hopefully finally lay the case to rest, including comparison with similar cases.
So far, Phar Lap's sample has only been compared with a stuffed monkey, he says. 
What is a synchrotron?
Lewis describes a synchrotron, or particle accelerator, as essentially a large x-ray machine that can concentrate a large number of x-rays onto a tiny object like a single hair.
The x-rays are produced by particles that are accelerated around a large ring at close to the speed of light. As the particles pass magnetic fields in the ring they emit rays approximately a billion times brighter than the Sun.
"In this case instead of looking at the x-rays that go straight through the hair ... you look at the x-rays that scatter off it and come off in different directions," he says.
"Those x-rays carry information about things like the arsenic and the chemistry of the arsenic."

No single event, like a huge meteor strike, is solely responsible for a mass extinction, says new research. Not even the demise of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago
If you can't decide if you prefer meteor impacts, volcanoes or some other explanation for Earth's biggest mass extinction events, take heart: you no longer have to choose.
A new statistical study of mass extinctions throughout the history of life on Earth is backing the idea that no single meteor, volcanic eruption or other lone gunman is ever to blame.
This even applies to the Cretaceous-Tertiary event that brought the end of dinosaurs 65 million years ago, the US researchers say.
Instead, the worst die-offs happen when some sort of interminable, multi-generational pressure on life is combined with a few powerful blows.
It's what is now being called the press-pulse theory of mass extinctions. 
Reading the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction literature and conversations with colleagues "made me wonder whether the simplistic scenario of 'everything's fine until one day in June when the asteroid hits and everything goes to hell-in-a-hand-basket' really explains the diversity of data," says plant fossil expert Associate Professor Nan Arens of Hobart and William Smith Colleges in New York. 
Wouldn't it make more sense, she surmised, if certain species were already vulnerable when the triggering event happened?
To test the idea, she and then-undergraduate student Ian West compiled a large database of marine organisms and their extinctions through geological time. 
They divvied up the past 488 million years into four groups: suspected meteor impacts (pulses), gigantic volcanic flood basalt eruptions (presses), periods with neither presses nor pulses, and times when press and pulse coincided.
They then compared average extinction rates in each group. 
Flood basalt eruptions are considered presses because they release vast amounts of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and can change the Earth's climate. 
Single or multiple event?
The researchers found similar extinction rates when a pulse or press occurred by itself, and when neither was occurring, says Arens.
"However, when an impact occurred during a time of volcanic flood, that produced higher extinction rates."
Arens is presenting her work this week at the annual meeting of the Geological Society of America in Philadelphia.
"The goal of our work was to come up with a unifying theory of mass extinctions," says West.
They also wanted to make the theory applicable to the rapid extinctions now being seen as a result of accelerating climate change (press) and the ongoing destruction of wild habitats by human activities worldwide (pulse).
"[The theory] is essentially a more eloquent way of saying what I and many other palaeontologists have been saying for many years," says Professor Gerta Keller of Princeton University.
"Namely that the impact-kill hypothesis is all wrong. Impacts alone could not have been the killing mechanism for the K-T [Cretaceous-Tertiary event] or any of the other major mass extinctions." 
Volcanic activity
In the late Cretaceous case massive volcanism, the Deccan Traps eruption in India, and attendant climate change, coincided with an impact that pushed highly stressed biota over the brink. 
"I'm very happy they have done the analysis based on the literature and come up with the same conclusions that palaeontologists have been preaching all along," Keller says.

Viruses may be able to cross into the brain, causing steady damage over the years
Forget where you left your glasses? Did those keys go missing again? A virus may be to blame.
Viruses that cause a range of ills from the common cold to polio may be able to infect the brain and cause steady damage, a team at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota reports.
"Our study suggests that virus-induced memory loss could accumulate over the lifetime of an individual and eventually lead to clinical cognitive memory deficits," says Dr Charles Howe, who reports the findings in the latest issue of the journal Neurobiology of Disease. 
The viruses are called picornaviruses and infect more than 1 billion people worldwide each year. 
They include the virus that causes polio, as well as colds and diarrhoea. People contract an average of two or three such infections a year. 
"We think picornavirus family members cross into the brain and cause a variety of brain injuries. For example, the polio virus can cause paralysis," Howe says. 
"It can injure the spinal cord and different parts of the brain responsible for motor function. In the [mouse] virus we studied, it did the same thing and also injured parts of the brain responsible for memory." 
The researchers infected mice with a virus called Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus, which is similar to human poliovirus.
Infected mice later had difficulty learning to navigate a maze. Some were barely affected, while others were completely unable to manage.
When the mice were killed and their brains examined, a correlating amount of damage was seen in the hippocampus region, related to learning and memory.
One virus particularly likely to cause brain damage is enterovirus 71, which is common in Asia, the researchers say.
It can cross over into the brain and cause encephalitis, a brain inflammation that can lead to coma and death. 
"Our findings suggest that picornavirus infections throughout the lifetime of an individual may chip away at the cognitive reserve, increasing the likelihood of detectable cognitive impairment as the individual ages," the researchers write.
"We hypothesise that mild memory and cognitive impairments of unknown aetiology may, in fact, be due to accumulative loss of hippocampus function caused by repeated infection with common and widespread neurovirulent picornaviruses."
Other viruses kill brain cells, including the herpes virus and HIV.

This mock-up illustrates the dangers foxes pose to penguins on Phillip Island
A drug that makes vixens neglect their cubs could help solve Australia's feral fox problem, researchers say.
They are looking at the drug cabergoline, which reduces fertility and interferes with maternal instincts, to see if it could control foxes on Phillip Island in Victoria.
The island is home to a renowned penguin colony and up to 150 unwanted foxes.
A fox can kill up to 30 penguins a night, says Dr Roger Kirkwood, a biologist at the Phillip Island Nature Park.
"We need to eradicate foxes from the island because just one fox can step in there and do so much damage," he says.
The foxes also feast on migratory mutton birds that visit the island, says Kirkwood.
He's working with University of Tasmania pharmacologist Professor Stuart McLean to study cabergoline.
In humans, the drug is used to treat Parkinson's disease.
But the scientists are interested in using the drug in foxes as it acts on the brain's dopamine receptors to block secretion of the hormone prolactin.
"[Foxes] rely on prolactin to become pregnant and maintain pregnancy and to lactate, and also for their mothering instinct after the cubs are born," says McLean. 
Because it suppresses maternal instincts, cabergoline makes vixens less likely to care for their cubs by bringing them food, grooming them and teaching them survival skills, which reduces their chances of survival.
The drug has not yet been tested on foxes on the island but preliminary research will be presented at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress next month.
A study looking at how long cabergoline remains in fox bait has also been submitted to the journal Wildlife Research.
Toll on penguins
Kirkwood says if foxes are allowed to breed out of control they could destroy Phillip Island's 60,000 strong penguin population.
Foxes have already reduced the number of penguin colonies on Phillip Island from 12 to just one in the past 80 years.
More than 1000 foxes have been eliminated since the introduction of a control program on the island in 1980, which includes shooting, poisoning, fumigating dens and using dogs to hunt the foxes.
Kirkwood says although foxes only live about five years the population is resilient and recovers quickly.
"If we stopped our program we reckon the carrying capacity of the island would be over 400 foxes, and they would eliminate the penguins given time if we didn't control them," he says.

Are you a YouTube legend? Be careful your videos don't get you into legal hot water
Internet law experts have called for Australian copyright laws to be amended so people can post online videos of themselves miming pop songs without risking prosecution.
Researcher Damien O'Brien and Professor Brian Fitzgerald of Queensland University of Technology (QUT) say miming copyright material and posting it online may be currently illegal.
They will explore copyright law in relation to the popular YouTube site in the Internet Law Bulletin.
The video sharing website YouTube hosts more than 65,000 new videos every day, many made by amateurs.
"A 12 year old girl uploads a video of herself lip-syncing the latest Shakira pop song onto YouTube and is served with a copyright infringement notice," they write.
"Has she breached copyright law?" The answer, they say, is yes. 
"Certainly many of the videos that are uploaded [onto YouTube] probably infringe copyright if they're reproductions or communications of the whole, or even a little bit of the [original]."
O'Brien says while there have been no prosecutions in Australia yet, major music companies, particularly in the US, have been active in demanding that such videos be removed from YouTube.
Calls for change
He says amendments to Australian copyright law currently being considered by parliament fail to take cases like amateur miming into account.
O'Brien says some types of reproduction are allowed under fair trading provisions in the amendments, but these don't cover cases like the one highlighted in his paper.
He's arguing for a defence of material being "highly transformative" and not competing with the original market. 
This would allow a 12 year old amateur to upload a video of herself miming to a sound track with impunity.
"It doesn't have to be a radical change [to the amendments], but something that allows someone to remix a  small amount of someone else's work and put it in a different context as long as it's not for commercial purposes and doesn't compete with the original," he says.
"It's pretty hard to see why something like that shouldn't be allowed."
New laws
The federal government last week introduced its proposed changes to copyright law into parliament.
Announcing the move, attorney general Philip Ruddock said the bill demonstrated "the government's commitment to ensuring laws reflect the continual changes to the technical landscape".
A spokesperson says following concerns about the bill, debate has been adjourned while a senate committee gives the legislation further consideration.
"The purpose of draft exposure bills is to circulate them for comment and expose any potential flaws before the legislation is introduced to parliament," the spokesperson says.
O'Brien's paper is also on the QUT ePrints website.

Scientists study Rio Tinto in Spain to learn more about Mars. The river has an extreme acidic pH and a high concentration of heavy metals, yet  microbes grow there. So could the harsh conditions on Mars also harbour life?
The US space agency's first experiments to look for organic matter on Mars may not have been sensitive enough to detect life, concludes a team of researchers studying Martian-like soils in remote regions on Earth.
The twin NASA Viking probes landed on the surface of Mars in 1976 to search for signs of past or present life.
One test involved rapidly heating soil samples so they vapourised, leaving trace molecules to be analysed by spectrometers. 
No biological materials were found and NASA abandoned ground exploration of Mars for more than 20 years.
But Dr Rafael Navarro-Gonz&aacute;lez, a researcher with the National Autonomous University of Mexico, and colleagues have another explanation for the Viking results.
Writing in the latest issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, they say the experiment could have missed low levels of biological activity.
The researchers built their theory on studies conducted with Viking-type instruments in some of Earth's harshest environments: the Antarctic Dry Valleys, the Atacama Desert of Chile and Peru, and deserts in Libya. 
Soil samples in those locations contain trace amounts of materials that Viking would have missed.
Despite inhospitable conditions, soil samples from many of the team's test sites showed signs of life.
In 2004, the Mars rover Opportunity discovered an iron-rich mineral called jarosite on the surface of Mars, points out Navarro-Gonz&aacute;lez. The same mineral is known to exist in Spain's river Rio Tinto.
"So I decided to collect sediments from this river, which has a very acidic pH ... high levels of iron and yet the presence of microorganisms from the three domains of life," he says.
The team also discovered that iron-rich soils could oxidise organic molecules into carbon dioxide, further reducing the amount of material left behind. 
This finding also might explain the high levels of carbon dioxide the Viking instruments measured in the Martian soil, say the researchers.
"The Martian surface could have several orders of magnitude more organics than the stated Viking detection limit," the authors write.
While most scientists believed Viking's findings to be clear-cut, others were not convinced.
Dr Gilbert Levin, one of the mission's lead scientists, has long maintained that his life-detection experiment found living microorganisms in the soil of Mars.
Researchers now also believe that the best place to look for signs of life is underground, which is more protected from solar radiation.
NASA's current approach to Mars exploration is to look for signs of past and present-day water, which is believed to be necessary to support life. 
Over the past 10 years, NASA has dispatched a series of increasingly sophisticated probes to Mars to survey minerals and geological formations from above the planet's surface, and to analyse soil and rock chemistry with rovers on the ground.
"We suggest that the design of future organic instruments for Mars should include other methods to be able to detect extinct and/or extant life," the authors conclude.
NASA's next two landers, the 2007 Phoenix mission and the 2009 Mars Science Laboratory, both include instruments to analyse soil samples for water, carbon dioxide and organic materials.
Europe's ExoMars mission, slated for launch in 2011 or 2013, is designed to characterise the biological environment on Mars.

Cloning a mammoth was one of Professor Hwang Woo-suk's sideline projects. But who do you call when you need tissue samples?
Disgraced South Korean stem cell scientist Professor Hwang Woo-suk says he spent private donations for research to pay the Russian mafia for mammoth tissues to clone extinct species.
Hwang, once celebrated as a national hero, was indicted in May on charges of fraud and embezzlement after prosecutors said he was the mastermind of a scheme to make it look like his team had produced stem cells through cloning human embryos. 
He previously told a Seoul court that he spent part of more than US$1 million in corporate donations for "peripheral activities related to research". 
"Some of the money was spent in contacting the Russia mafia as we tried to clone mammoths," Hwang told the court during a hearing this week.
"But you can't say that [on the expense claim] so we expensed it as money for cows for experiment."
Hwang previously said he obtained mammoth tissues from glaciers and tried to clone them three times but failed. 
Prosecutors have charged Hwang with fraud to secure funds and misusing US$2.9 million in state funds and private donations as well as violating bioethics laws in procuring human eggs for research. 
An investigation panel at Seoul National University, where Hwang once worked, said his team fabricated key data in the two papers on embryonic stem cells that were once heralded. 
Misuse of state funds carries a penalty of up to 10 years in jail, while violating the bioethics laws can lead to three years' imprisonment, prosecutors say.
Hwang denied any of the funds were used for anything other than research. He described extra expenses incurred when trying to secure animal ovaries in addition to paying for junior researchers' housing and travel. 
"Do you know how hard it is to secure four or five animal ovaries at butcher shops? You need to keep the workers there happy," he says.

Surgeons may perform a full face transplant within months
The world's first full face transplant, which was authorised by a UK medical watchdog this week, is hedged with technical, psychological and ethical challenges, experts say. 
The green light given to surgeon Mr Peter Butler by the ethics committee at London's Royal Free Hospital opens the way to an operation that could take place within months.
But the decision was reached cautiously, reflecting an agonising debate about safety.
These fears were only eased after French doctors last November carried out the first partial face transplant and in July pronounced it a success. 
These are the main challenges from a full facial graft, say experts: 
Surgery
Nerves and the main vessels that carry blood to the face are connected by surgery under a microscope. 
This task is common in reconstructive surgery and has a high success rate. Of the 24 hand transplants that have been carried out on 18 people over the past eight years, only two have failed. 
But microsurgery also carries a 5-10% risk of transplant failure from clots that may form within the connected blood vessels in the first few days after surgery.
Immunosupressors
These powerful drugs inhibit the immune system so that the transplanted tissue is not attacked by the body's defences. But they also make the body more vulnerable to infection and disease. 
In addition, heavy use of immunosuppressors boosts the risk of cancer. The danger of life-threatening diseases poses an ethical problem because before the transplant, the recipient was generally healthy. 
To counter the immunosuppressor problem, doctors may give the graft recipient tiny doses of material from the donor so that his or her immune system becomes accustomed to the tissue and therefore stops attacking it. 
The technique is still experimental but has had promising results with kidney transplant patients.
Doctors who performed the partial face transplant on Isabelle Dinoire, 38, last November also gave her a bone marrow graft from the donor. 
Psychological
Selecting the patient with the right profile is one of the hardest tasks of all. 
The face is the mark of one's identity, so wearing someone else's face, or seeing someone else with the face of a deceased relative, for instance, may be deeply disturbing for some.
But the operation is new, which means no-one really knows for sure how it will work. 
On the positive side, computer modelling suggests facial tissue looks quite different and may be even unidentifiable when attached to someone else because the underlying bones and muscles fill it out differently. 
"Every graft of a visible organ leads to an identity split, the consequences of which can be very serious if the recipient does not succeed in psychologically accepting the organ and in rebuilding its social expression in everyday life," French experts wrote in The Lancet in July.
The right candidate is therefore someone who is robust and does not entertain the belief that the operation will miraculously restore their former lives, a hope that fades to bitterness and alienation when complications inevitably occur. 
Seen as 'alien'
In the case of the world's first hand transplant, recipient Clint Hallam begged to have the new limb cut off because he viewed it as alien. 
"Thorough psychological preparation is vital to the successful selection of patients," says The Face Trust, a charity set up to fund research for surgical reconstruction and face transplants.
"The challenge we face is that the people who cope least well with facial injury may also be the [people who] cope least well with facial transplantation  and its long-term impact on lifestyle."

Sequencing the honey bee genome could improve the search for genes linked to social behaviour
Scientists have unravelled the genetic code of the honey bee, uncovering clues about its complex social behaviour, heightened sense of smell and African origins. 
The results, published in the journal Nature, makes the bee the third insect to have its genome mapped and joins the fruit fly and mosquito in the exclusive club. 
The honey bee, or Apis mellifera, evolved more slowly than the other insects but has more genes related to smell. 
"In biology and biomedicine, honey bees are used to study many diverse areas, including allergic disease, development, gerontology, neuroscience, social behaviour and venom toxicology," says Professor Gene Robinson, director of the University of Illinois and one of the leaders of the project.
"The honey bee genome project is ushering in a bright era of bee research for the benefit of agriculture, biological research and human health," he adds. 
With its highly evolved social structure of tens of thousands of worker bees commanded by the queen, the honey bee genome could also improve the search for genes linked to social behaviour. 
But the consortium of scientists, which includes Australians, says a comprehensive analysis of the honey bee and other species will be needed to understand its social life.
The queen lives 10 times as long as workers and lays up to 2000 eggs a day. Despite having tiny brains, honey bees display honed cognitive abilities and learn to associate a flower's colour, shape and scent with food, which increases its foraging ability. 
The scientists who analysed the genetic code have discovered the honey bee originated in Africa and spread to Europe in two ancient migrations. 
"The African bees' spread throughout the New World is a spectacular example of biological invasion," the scientists write. 
The number of genes in honey bees related to smell outnumber those linked to taste. The insects also have fewer genes than the fruit fly or mosquito for immunity. 
Honey bees use pheromones, substances secreted by glands, to distinguish the gender, caste and age of other bees, according to the scientists. 
"This DNA sequence is a major step towards answering a basic question of social evolution. At the genomic level, what does it take to engineer an advanced colonial insect?" says Professor Edward Wilson, of Harvard University in a commentary on the research.

Researchers say their system of injecting ethanol into the engine saves petrol and costs consumers less than a hybrid car
Injecting small quantities of ethanol into car engines at moments of peak demand could improve fuel economy, US scientists say.
Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) say a little squirt into the engine when the car is accelerating sharply or climbing a steep hill could improve fuel economy by 20-30%.
The researchers say such as system would allow carmakers to use smaller engines in their vehicles.
They say this would reduce weight and improve fuel economy at a lower cost to consumers than by adding a hybrid engine.
"To have a big impact on reducing oil consumption, one needs a low-cost way of improving efficiency, so a lot of people buy the car," says Dr Daniel Cohn, senior research scientist at MIT
He estimates that adding the ethanol injection system to a car would cost about US$1000 (A$1300) and that cars using the new system could be in mass production by 2011. 
"We view it as a very important near-term way to reduce oil consumption," Cohn says. 
The scientists say their system would only use small amounts of ethanol. And Cohn estimates the ethanol tank in cars using the technology would need to be refilled every three months or so. 
A turbocharger is added to produce more power. The ethanol injection system with the turbocharger would give a driver more power than a conventional engine of the same size, the scientists say.
How about 'knock'?
The higher pressures and temperatures of a turbocharged engine can lead to a problem known as knock, which occurs when the fuel and air in the engine explode prematurely, hurting performance and potentially damaging the engine. 
Cohn says his group's technology avoids that problem by injecting ethanol into the engine when knock is likely to occur.
The ethanol vaporises and cools the fuel-air mixture, keeping it from exploding until the engine is ready. 
"This is a very special feature of ethanol," Cohn says.
The researchers are developing and testing their system with car manufacturer Ford.

Today, the Amazon flows into the Atlantic Ocean. But millions of years ago, it flowed in the opposite direction
Even the most reliable geographical facts, like the direction of the world's largest river, can change dramatically over geological time. 
Millions of years ago, a new study suggests, the Amazon River flowed from east to west, rather than the current eastward path to the Atlantic Ocean. 
The evidence for this continent-wide reversal comes from tiny, dark, virtually indestructible minerals called zircons that are perpetually recycled in the sandstones of the Amazon Basin. 
"People use the zircons in ancient sands to reconstruct continents, to understand what might have been upstream," says geologist Russell Mapes, a doctoral candidate at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill. 
Very often zircons are the only mineral remnants of long-gone mountain ranges. 
Geologists know this thanks to new technology that measures the age of the minerals by the minute quantities of uranium and lead isotopes within them. The isotopes reveal how long it has been since the zircon solidified from molten rock. 
In the case of the Amazon zircons, Mapes with his US and Brazilian colleagues, discovered that the minerals don't come from the relatively young Andes at all.
Instead, they are 1.3 to 2.1 billion years old. That strongly suggests the zircons must have eroded out of some mountain range that bordered eastern South America back when it was still attached to Africa, before there was an Atlantic Ocean at all.
Yet the zircons were found to the west of the region where they were born, so the river must have once flowed in that direction, the researchers conclude.
"The rocks we saw on the river suggested this," says Mapes. "But when I got the actual data back, I was happy."
Ages later, about 65 million years ago, the Andes began to rise on the western edge of South America, blocking the river's passage to the Pacific and shifting its flow to the east. Today the zircon is all that remains of the South American-African Mountains. 
Mapes is due to present the discovery this week at the meeting of the Geological Society of America in Philadelphia.
"You couldn't tell this without this new tool," says geologist Dr Paul Link of Idaho State University, referring to the technology to sample individual layers of zircon minerals with precision, and then count the isotope atoms to gauge age. 
Link is working on a similar drainage reversal in North America, even further back in time. 
"I think that what it illustrates is that when a new tool is developed, then all of a sudden you can make interesting conclusions about which way rivers drained," he says. 
That, in turn, can reveal how very different the world once was.
"Even things like huge rivers are very temporary in the scheme of Earth time," says Mapes.

Mastodon's faught hormonally charged battles at certain times of the year
Battle scars on male mastodon tusks show these Ice Age giants were not the peaceful creatures once thought, according to new findings. 
The scars reveal they fought in brutal combat each year during seasonal phases of heightened sexual activity and aggression.
The discovery, announced at a recent Society of Vertebrate Paleontology meeting in Ontario, counters the view that now-extinct mastodons were peaceful, passive creatures that rarely engaged in battles.
It also strengthens the link between mastodon and modern elephant behaviour, since male bull elephants also fight seasonal, hormonally-charged battles to show their dominance and win desired mates.
Like warriors with different weapons, however, the two animals had distinct fighting techniques, says lead author Professor Daniel Fisher, a University of Michigan palaeontologist.
"Mastodon tusks curve upward strongly at the tips and appear to have been used in a vigorous up-thrusting motion," says Fisher.
Elephant tusks are less curved and therefore tend to be used more "in a straight thrusting move", he adds.
Fisher's analysis of mastodon tusks and skulls reveals that such ramming caused the lower part of the tusk to rotate backward, "crunching it against the back wall of the tusk socket".
He found that although the tusk continued to grow by adding layers of ivory to its base, pitted scars line up along the outside curve of the tusk base.
"It's not just one event, but a whole series of events that is preserved in this tusk record of fighting," he says.
Depends on the season
Using previous research about mastodon tusk growth patterns, Fisher also found the scars correspond to seasonal patterns, the pits formed each year of the adult male animal's life during mid-spring to early summer. 
Studies on mastodon vertebrae also helped fill out a picture of gory battles between the creatures, which were 2-3 metres tall.
"For example, we have evidence of tusks stabbing into the vertebral column, penetrating the space traversed by the spinal cord, from a direction that implies the victim was already lying on his side on the ground; in other words, the violence went on, even after one animal was down," Fisher says.
Other fossils suggest some of the animals were butchered in autumn, most likely by humans, who may have caused or contributed to the extinction of mastodons 11,000 years ago.
Few broken bones
Dr Jeffrey Saunders, curator and chair of geology at the Illinois State Museum, says he has excavated over 72 mastodons.
"I always viewed them as being rather passive animals because I never found many broken bones, maybe one or two broken ribs. But I greatly respect Dr Fisher's work and I continue to be open-minded about the possibilities," he says.
Saunders, who once found himself between two fighting bull male elephants while in a small jeep, adds, "I also think it's interesting that similarities between mastodons and modern elephants seem to persist, given that these animals parted evolutionary ways 40 million years ago. The basic elephant design must be successful to have persisted so long."

A Botai village, with its horse yards, would have looked like this
Evidence from soil inside the remains of a 5600-year-old horse yard indicates that the ancient Botai people of Kazakhstan were among the earliest to domesticate horses. 
But the Botai probably ate and milked their horses as often as they rode them. 
The horse yards are part of an archaeological site in northern Kazakhstan known as Krasnyi Yar.
This was once a large village occupied by the Copper Age Botai, says Dr Sandra Olsen, curator at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, who leads a team that has been investigating horse domestication for years.
Associate Professor Rosemary Capo, a geologist colleague from the University of Pittsburgh, presented some of the soil evidence for horses this week at a Geological Society of America meeting in Philadelphia. 
"We really don't understand any major signs of changes in horses with domestication," says Dr Melinda Zeder, an archaeologist at the Smithsonian Institution who specialises in the origins of animal and plant domestication. 
Zeder refers to physical changes in horse bones from ancient middens.
Nor, so far, is there a direct way to determine what people were doing with their horses that early on, she says.
For these reasons she and her colleagues have been building their case with less direct evidence.
"Here's an approach to documenting horse domestication that's extremely new," says Zeder, of the evidence presented at the conference. "Sort of like Perry Mason, they're building circumstantial evidence."
That evidence comes from circular arrangements of posts and the soil differences found inside and outside the horse yard.
Comparing soils
Inside the yard, the soil contained up to 10 times the phosphorus as outside soils, but lower concentrations of nitrogen. That's what you'd expect if the soil inside the yard was enriched with horse manure.
Modern horse manure, for comparison, is loaded with phosphorous, potassium and nitrogen. The nitrogen is the easiest to lose to groundwater or the air. 
Phosphorus, on the other hand, can be held in place by calcium and iron, says Capo, one of the scientists who analysed the soil.
"High phosphorous could also indicate human occupation," says Capo. "But that's usually accompanied by other geochemical signatures, which we didn't find in the [horse yard] samples." 
There was also high sodium concentration in the horse yard samples, which could be from urine, suggests Olsen.
Smoking gun
The real smoking gun, says Olsen, will be if they can detect long-lived molecules of fat in these samples that can be attributed specifically to horses. That analysis is now being arranged.
So what were the Botai doing with those horses?
Olsen says they probably ate them and used them as pack animals. They may also have milked the mares to create a vitamin-rich, mildly alcoholic beverage that's still consumed today in Kazakhstan.

Antechinus females go to extraordinary lengths to make sure their offspring survive
Some female marsupials have sex with as many males as possible to produce the fittest and healthiest offspring, Australian researchers report.
The brown antechinus (Antechinus stuartii) usually only breeds once in her life, so she has added pressure to make sure her young have the best chance of surviving.
Researchers report in today's issue of the journal Nature how the mouse-like marsupial stores the sperm of many suitors for up to two weeks in her ova ducts.
Sperm from the 'strongest' males then go on to fertilise her prized eggs. And the result may be up to eight healthy offspring sired from four strong males.
Dr Diana Fisher and colleagues from the Australian National University conducted two separate mating experiments.
In the first, they took female marsupials from the wild and when they were in season allowed them to mate either with a single male, or with three different males, every two days.
A year later they replicated the experiment, but kept lactating females in captivity until just before weaning.
This allowed the researchers to determine whether the previous benefit of polyandry depended on stressful conditions in their natural habitat, or could be replicated in the laboratory. 
They found the females in both populations weren't particularly fussy and, given the chance, mated happily with multiple partners.
The only males they avoided in the wild were those that were obviously picked on by other males; those perceived as 'weak'.
"By experimentally assigning mates to females, we were able to show that polyandry [females mating with more than one male during the mating season] greatly increases offspring survival," Fisher says.
"DNA profiling shows that males that gain high paternity under sperm competition sire offspring that are more viable."
While many females in the animal and plant world mate with multiple partners, researchers have been at a loss to explain why. After all, the practice can be costly in terms of egg production, disease and injury. 
Earlier studies suggested polyandry yielded genetic benefits and could increase offspring survival, but until now the reasons why were unclear and the same effects had yet to be proved for mammals in the wild.
The researchers conclude that the practice of polyandry leads to 'better quality' offspring, an important factor in light of the fact that the marsupial will usually breed only once in her lifetime.

Adverts that use thin models can make you reach for the biscuit tin
Young women obsessed with their own body image eat more food after looking at magazine adverts that feature the 'ideal' thin body, research shows.
But those with a healthier body image, who you might expect to be less influenced by the adverts, eat less.
The Australian study shows that advertising affects eating behaviour, just not necessarily the way we think.
The researchers publish their study in the November issue of the journal Eating Behaviors.
Fiona Monro, a PhD student at the University of New South Wales, tries to explain the results.
"We would expect people who value the way they look would be reminded by viewing the image and not eat," she says.
"We're not sure why we found the reverse but possibly because of stress.
"[Women obsessed with their appearance] see the idealised image and think about their own body so turn to food. They might think 'what's the point, I'm never going to look like that, I may as well eat' or the image makes them think they're thinner than they are so they eat more."
Two hours after their last meal Monro asked 68 female university students to rank the importance of physical attractiveness, health and physical fitness to determine whether they value the way their body looks more or less than the way it functions.
The researchers were interested in the notion of self-objectification, the way some people view themselves and their bodies as an object to be valued for external appearance.
The women's answers categorised women as low or high self-objectifiers, with high self-objectifiers valuing appearance more.
Participants then viewed six magazine advertisements for body-related products like diet pills, some containing images of idealised female models, some not.
Body-obsessed people (or high objectifiers) ate more food (sweet and savoury biscuits) and sweet biscuits, after viewing idealised body adverts than adverts without models.
Low objectifiers ate less food after seeing idealised images than the other adverts.
"There's no doubt these images have an effect on some women and can lead to changes in eating behaviour, especially when you consider how many images people are exposed to every day," Monro says.
She says in future eating disorders might be reduced by identifying high-objectifiers in schools, enabling education to change emphasis on appearance and promote a broader acceptance of body shapes.

This footprint was made by a two-legged dinosaur that walked along a sandy beach 165 million years ago
Scientists studying how emus walk have brought to life the mysterious moves of two-footed Jurassic dinosaurs travelling along a long-lost beach.
Computer models have been developed to simulate the gait, and therefore the possible tracks, of specific dinosaurs.
But live emus allow scientists to directly compare complex tracks to specific behaviours, say researchers looking at the thousands of tracks left behind 165 million years ago by dinosaurs at Red Gulch in northern Wyoming.
Among the surprises they've found is that tracks once interpreted as steady walking may actually be created by the animals stopping at mid-stride.
Another enigmatic type of track that now makes sense is where the dinosaurs appear to have crossed one leg over the other.
The motion is a seemingly weird thing to do, until you watch an emu making the same sort of track, says Brent Breithaupt, director and curator of the University of Wyoming's Geological Museum.
