It's the details that have been elusive, and why Comet 73P/Schwassman-Wachmann 3's break-up so conveniently near Earth is getting so much attention. 
Yesterday, for instance, some brand new visible light images of the comet from 3 May were released by astronomers who caught the disintegration drama with the 8.2-metre Subaru Telescope in Hawaii. 
"Compared to observations five days before by VLT [the Very Large Telescope, in Chile], we see some more parts coming off," says Dr Catherine Ishida of the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, which operates the Subaru Telescope on Mauna Kea.
One Subaru close-up of the wake of the comet's 'Fragment B' shows distinct miniature comets dropping away in the wake. Subaru astronomers have counted 13 such mini-comets.
Big telescopes will continue to take turns looking at the comet when there is time and until the comet is too close to the Sun for the telescopes to look without damaging their instruments.
Ishida says each new view tells another part of the story.
"The key thing is that the comet is changing rapidly," she says.


Scientists are using star vibrations to tell them what stars are made of
Juggling multiple roles seems to be good for women's health, new research shows
Juggling a career with family life may help to keep women healthy, a new study shows.
Women who have multiple roles are less likely than homemakers, single mothers or childless women to report poor health or to be obese in middle age.
The UK researchers report their results in the latest issue of the Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health.
"Women who occupied multiple roles over the long term reported relatively good health at age 54," says lead author Dr Anne McMunn, of University College London. 
"It looks like women are relatively healthy as a result of combining work and family life." 
McMunn and her team analysed self-reported health records of more than 2000 women born in 1946.
The scientists then tracked the women in their mid-20s and mid-50s, measuring their body mass index. 
Information on their marital status, work history and whether they had children was also included. 
The researchers found that women who had been homemakers most of their lives were most likely to report poor health, followed by single mothers and childless women. 
Homemakers tended to gain weight more quickly and had the highest rate of obesity at 38% while women who were employees, wives and mothers had the lowest. 
McMunn says it has been known for some time that women who combine employment with motherhood and partnership have better health.
But it was not clear whether they were working and having children because they were healthy, or whether they were healthy because they were combining the two. 
"This study is the first to show which way that direction runs," she adds. 
"There may be potential long-term health benefits of being able to participate in all areas of society."

It may look like farmyard junk but new research says it paints a unique picture of our agricultural heritage, so has great cultural value
Farm 'graveyards', those piles of abandoned vehicles and rusty machinery that dot rural landscapes, are like cherished living photo albums and family heirlooms.
That's the conclusion of Di Smith, a PhD candidate at Flinders University of South Australia, after studying the archaeology of farm graveyards.
Her study, believed to be the first of its type in Australia and possibly the world, found these graveyards, are part of our cultural heritage and of great archaeological value.
"I was looking for the answer to my questions of why do farmers keep all these abandoned vehicles and machinery on their property, why do they keep them for so long, and what do they do with them?" Smith says.
Smith sent out questionnaires to 800 farmers - including woolgrowers, crocodile farmers, grain croppers, pig and avocado farmers - across Australia.
Of the nearly 150 farmers who responded, 60% said they had farm graveyards, many of them inherited.
Of those that didn't have sites, many said they used to have one and regretted getting rid of it to the scrap dealer.
"To farmers [these sites] were very special and had a very useful purpose in recycling. It became very clear to me that they were not just rubbish dumps where [farmers] disposed of stuff and never looked at it again," Smith says. 
She followed up her questionnaire by conducting detailed artefact surveys and inventories, mapping the sites and recording the histories of 16 farm graveyard sites across South Australia and Victoria. She then looked at sites in Alberta, Canada.
Sites in Australia and Canada share many similarities, Smith says.
"[But] Canadian farmers were very neat in their approach, often lining [their equipment] up in neat rows along fences, so that they are very accessible."
Both countries' farmers are inventive when it comes to recycling, for instance, using old machinery for spare parts.
Smith says her research gives important insight into the deeper meaning these sites hold for farmers and their families.
"They have an important meaning as an agricultural heritage. It tells farmers who they are, where they've been and where they might be going to as far as a place that encapsulates their cultural heritage," she says.
"To them, [the graveyards are as valuable as] a museum collection or a photo album. Because they can walk through it, and visit all these old friends along the way."
Smith's research, which is being showcased during National Archaeology Week next week, is being considered for publication.

Research into digital signal processing chips didn't live up to one researcher's promises
The scandal of a Chinese scientist who lied about his inventions is just the tip of the iceberg in an academic environment where, analysts say, incentives to cheat are great and the risk of being found out is small. 
Professor Chen Jin, dean of the microelectronics school at the prestigious Shanghai Jiaotong University, was fired after a government investigation found he had faked research on his Hanxin series of digital signal processing chips, authorities announce.
The research was seen as an important step in helping China wean itself off reliance on foreign technology. 
But a two-month investigation found Chen's chips could not perform the functions he claimed, according to the Xinhua news agency. And he used another company's research and claimed it as his own. 
The case was discovered only after a colleague blew the whistle and after Chen, 37, had received large grants from the government and was praised as one of the country's top young scientists.
Analysts say the case shows there are many pitfalls as the government strives to encourage its top schools and industries to come up with their own technological inventions to help the country catch up with the West. 
Pressure on scientists and academics is also intense, leading some to take shortcuts, analysts say. 
"In the past, academics were evaluated through a long process of monitoring their work. Nowadays ... there is pressure to show results quickly," says Dr Fan Peilei, a Chinese postdoctoral fellow at the UN University in Yokohama, Japan, who specialises in China's high-tech industries. 
"The salary now is based on how many papers you issue, what new inventions you come up with." 
But there is no domestic or overseas system to scrutinise Chinese researchers' work, Fan says. 
"In Western countries, it's very open. With Chinese research, partly due to the language problem and lack of recognition that China can invent anything good, there is no one properly checking the work," she says. 
"If there's some claim that some scientist invented something, there's no proper international review system ... The domestic supervision system is also not mature." 
Looking to the West
An unnamed internet commentator says online that the root of the problem is China is too anxious to catch up with technologically advanced countries. 
"Few people ... recognise reaching the level of the West is a long-term process," he says. 
There are fears the case could bring Chinese inventions into disrepute. 
"This will have a negative impact on the whole chip industry," says Zhang Ming, of Hangzhou Guoxin, a company that develops computer chips for satellites and cable TV.
The government's current five-year plan for the 2006-2010 period places special emphasis on developing an innovation-driven economy to rely less on simply being the world's factory for low-cost goods. 
At the same time, complaints about academic corruption have been more vocal and there are signs that the government is waking up to the problem. 
In February the education ministry urged people to report academic fraud, saying it was very concerned about the problem. 
This year two other academics were publicly disciplined. 
A professor at the medical school of China's Ivy League-type Tsinghua University was demoted in March after being accused of lying about his accomplishments on his CV. 
And a Tianjin Foreign Language Institute professor accused of plagiarism in winning a professorship was dismissed after losing a lawsuit in January. 
Granted there is a lot of good scientific research in China that is genuine, the case should serve as a warning to everyone, Fan says. 
Fan, however, praises authorities for announcing the microchip case.
"That's an improvement. This is very different from 20 years ago," she says. 
Greg Shea, president of the US Information Technology Office, an industry lobby group, in Beijing agrees.
"I think it is encouraging to see unfortunate incidents like this are coming to the attention of government officials," Shea says. 
"The role of the education system, r&d system and government funding ... all of this is being examined and looked at with fresh eyes in light of the high level of focus on creating an innovation society ... That's good for domestic industry and foreign industry." 
The government has banned Chen from conducting further state research and ordered him to give back investment money.

Will new copyright laws protect online artists?
The federal government's proposed changes to Australian copyright law fail to address issues facing digital artists, experts say.
Attorney general Philip Ruddock announced the reforms this week, saying they would make the law fairer for consumers and tougher on copyright pirates.
But Damien O'Brien of the Queensland University of Technology law school, says the revised laws profess, but essentially fail, to keep track with developing technologies and emerging markets.
"It doesn't look like they're very radical at all," he says. "They seem fairly conservative."
He says the new laws will let people tape their favourite TV show or download music onto their MP3 players.
But he says they won't make life any easier for the creators of so-called internet and video mashups, which combine content from a number of different sources to produce something new.
O'Brien, who has co-authored a paper called Mashups, Remixes and Copyright Law published on the university website, says most mashups made by unauthorised use of copyright material will remain illegal under the proposed laws.
Mashups are an example of remix culture, which has roots in the postmodern tendency to cannibalise texts from various sources and is being driven by technology that makes this easier to do than ever before.
For example a website could combine music from one source with images from another source and a search function from somewhere else.
Mashups are common in music videos and websites. For example, pop star Kylie Minogue has used legal mashups in her music videos while the website ChicagoCrime mixes police data with Google maps.
Meanwhile, the iSpecies search links data from GenBank, academic literature from Google Scholar and images from Yahoo image search.
"The challenge ... is the extent to which mashup and remix artists should be allowed to borrow, in a seamless manner, from the past to create the future," O'Brien writes in his paper. 
"For the first time in history creativity ... is subject to regulation."
Professor Matthew Rimmer, an expert in copyright law at the Australian National University, agrees the proposed laws don't do much to address issues in the latest technologies.
He says the changes go some way to recognising the use of copyright works for critique and humour.
"But it's not a carte blanche," he says.
O'Brien says it's disappointing that the reforms didn't include an open-ended "fair use" clause, which would be one way of mashup artists and others using copyright material legally.
Creative commons and mashup guilds
One way to address restrictions placed on mashup artists is through the concept of a creative common, says Jessica Coates of the creative commons project run from Queensland University of Technology.
Under the concept, artists can license their work for use in certain ways, including a mashup.
"The idea is that [licences] can be used by owners to make their work more widely available," Coates says.
"If you're trying to do innovation in a digital realm it can be very hard because you're using reproductions all the time ... so the idea with a creative common licence is to try to get material out into the common realm as long as it isn't used for commercial purposes."
Mashup guilds are another solution, says O'Brien.
"Mashup artists can form guilds to protect themselves against copyright holders who threaten to sue them," he says.
"It's the idea that if they form a group they can try and counterbalance the threat of litigation."
Testing the bounds
Rimmer says mashup artists may enjoy operating on the fringes of the law.
"One reason that mashups have attracted such interest and popular acclaim is that they partly depend on the illegality, they depend on breaching the normal controls," he says.
"There are always going to be people who don't seek permission and there's always going to be an innovative culture going on beyond the limits of the law."
A draft bill including the reforms will be released shortly, the government says.

The ability to plan for the future has been around for at least 14 million years, scientists say, when the apes shared a common ancestor
Apes plan for the future, according to new research that questions whether humans are the only animals to think ahead.
German research published today in the journal Science says apes can choose an appropriate tool to reach a treat and save the tool for the future instead of using it immediately.
The researchers, from the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, say that planning for future, not just current, needs is one of the most formidable human cognitive achievements.
This is because it imposes a long delay between performing an action and being rewarded for it.
The researchers let bonobo chimpanzees and orangutans select tools to reach grapes and juice bottles. 
They chose appropriate tools half of the time, took them to their sleeping rooms then used them up to 14 hours later when retrieving the treats. 
Both species show the skill, the researchers say, suggesting it evolved at least 14 million years ago, when all great ape species shared a common ancestor.
"Our results suggest that future planning is not a uniquely human ability, contradicting the notion that it emerged in hominids only within the past 2.5 to 1.6 million years," they write.
First evidence of its kind
Associate Professor Thomas Suddendorf, a psychologist from Australia's University of Queensland, says this is the first published evidence that apes save tools for future use.
Suddendorf, who comments on the study in the same issue of Science, says the findings also give a glimpse of our evolutionary past and provide a starting point from which researchers can begin to reconstruct the evolution of the human mind.
"The fact that such simple performance of great apes is exciting reminds us how special and precious our foresight really is. It is so common that we take it for granted," he says.
But he says there is no evidence yet that apes can anticipate a future mental state. For example, there is no evidence they can anticipate being thirsty when they're not currently thirsty.
How about other animals?
Scrub jays, birds found in the Americas, are animals that also plan for the future, the scientists say. These birds move their food around to decrease the chance of it being stolen.
Suddendorp says some species that appear to be planning for the futures, say by building nests or hoarding food, are actually using instinctive behaviour or associative learning.

Two miners walk free from a Tasmanian goldmine after being trapped a kilometre underground, highlighting the dangers of mine work
Australian researchers are developing a computerised system that monitors the performance of miners and tells management if workers are getting tired.
The system, designed to improve safety for haul truck operators, will be discussed at the national conference of the Cooperative Research Centres Association this week, shortly after the Beaconsfield mining disaster in northern Tasmania, in which one miner was killed and two others were trapped for two weeks.
University of Sydney PhD student Stewart Worrell, who is being funded by CRCMining, says the sensing device wouldn't have made a difference in the Beaconsfield rockfall because fatigue wasn't an issue.
But he says the goldmine accident, which took the life of miner Larry Knight and trapped his workmates Brant Webb and Todd Russell, highlights the danger of working in mines.
Worrell says the technology is all about fatigue management.
He says fatigue statistics are under-reported, but US figures for 2001-2003 show there are eight fatigue-related fatalities in mines each year.
He says the system uses sensors fitted to the trucks and analyses data collected during haul operations, like the ability of the driver to keep to a straight line and driver speed.
"We have sensors attached to trucks which can monitor the truck's position on the road and detect when other trucks and vehicles are nearby," he says.
"The software analyses how a driver's performance changes over the duration of the shift and from there we can determine when there are threats and alert the driver.
"We can detect if the truck's driving off the road or if there's a potential collision.
"We might say 'this guy's driven over the centre of the road a couple of times so it's time to have a break'."
Data stored on each truck is also automatically downloaded to a central database when the haul truck returns to the drop-off area.
There, it's filtered and refined and the statistics are reported to mining management, which can then use the information to upgrade safety or predict the impact of any planned changes.
The system is already in place in two West Australian mines and other operations in Australia and internationally are considering taking it up, Worrell says.
He says the technology is particularly suited to a mining environment, which tends to be in an enclosed area, but it's also being considered for train drivers.

Maritime enthusiasts tried to relive Captain Cook's voyage to the Pacific in a replica of his ship Endeavour. But the replica ran aground in Botany Bay in April 2005, the day before it was due to sail into Sydney Harbour. The ship is pictured here, sitting at the Garden Island naval dock, awaiting repairs
Captain James Cook's Endeavour, the 18th century ship he sailed on his epic voyage to Australia, may be one of the four shipwrecks found off the coast of the US, archaeologists say.
The ship is among four from a British fleet used during the US Revolutionary War found off Rhode Island.
Researchers with the Rhode Island Marine Archaeology Project say they believe the ships, and two others previously discovered, are part of a 13-vessel transport fleet intentionally sunk by the British in Newport Harbor in 1778 to keep French ships from landing to aid the Americans' drive for independence. 
The archaeologists says one of the 13 ships in the sunken British fleet was the Lord Sandwich, which records show was once the Endeavour, the vessel Cook used to sail the Pacific Ocean, map New Zealand and survey the eastern coast of Australia in 1768-1771. 
Cook, acknowledged by historians as one of the greatest navigators of all time, is credited with surveying Australia's east coast on the Endeavour expedition.
Archaeologists say it is unclear which ship could be the Endeavour. Seven of the ships in the British fleet have not been found. But they say the latest find raises the chances that one of the discovered ships is the Endeavour. 
"There is a 47% chance that we have our hands on the Endeavour," says DK Abbass, executive director of the Rhode Island Marine Archaeology Project, a nonprofit organisation devoted to studying the state's maritime history. 
She adds it is unlikely anything on the ships would provide a direct link to Cook.
"Quite frankly, we could be working on her right now and never be able to prove it," Abbass says.
It may take years to fully investigate the shipwrecks found so far, Abbass says. 
Using historical materials and sonar, the archaeologists discovered the ships in Narragansett Bay, about about a kilometre off Newport. 
Divers found ballast piles about 9 to 11 metres underwater, with the ship's keel and other parts embedded in the sea floor.
They also found at least one cannon, an anchor with a 5 metre shank and a cream-coloured fragment of an 18th century British ceramic teapot. 
Historically, the finding is significant because it helps tell the story of the siege of Newport, marking France's first attempt to aid the American insurrection against the British. 
Though the effort failed, leaders from each side, George Washington representing the Americans and Comte de Rochambeau for America's French allies, met in Newport two years later, to formalise their cooperation for subsequent battles.
The French ultimately helped the Americans entrap British forces on a peninsula at Yorktown, Virginia.
"So, what you have here is the British are geared up for the colonial rebellion and now they're looking at an international conflict," says Rod Mather, an associate professor of maritime history and underwater archaeology at the University of Rhode Island.
The shipwrecks are Rhode Island property, Abbass says. There are no plans to raise them.
Officials estimate more than two dozen ships from the Revolutionary War period lie beneath Rhode Island's waters. They include British Royal Navy frigates, vessels from the Continental Navy and a French ship.

Benzene forms when vitamin C and a preservative combine in the can
Reports of benzene in soft drinks have been confirmed in Australia by government authorities who say the levels pose no health risk.
A spokesperson for Food Standards Australia and New Zealand (FSANZ) says a recent study has found levels of benzene in Australian soft drinks are under 10 parts per billion.
"These levels are very, very low," the spokesperson says. "Five years ago we wouldn't even have been able to detect it."
FSANZ says the main source of benzene exposure for the general population is traffic pollution, air round petrol stations, and active and passive smoking.
The spokesperson says someone would need to drink more than 20 litres of a drink to consume an amount of benzene equal to the amount breathed from city air in a day.
"It's an exceedingly small amount," he says. "We don't believe it poses a health hazard."
But he says any amount of benzene in food is undesirable and FSANZ is working with soft-drink manufacturers to find ways of reducing levels to a minimum.
Vitamin C + preservative = benzene
Benzene, a carcinogen, is found in the environment from natural and man-made sources. 
FSANZ says soft drinks containing ascorbic acid and the preservative sodium benzoate (identified as 211) have traces of benzene.
Ascorbic acid reacts with copper and iron found in water to from hydroxyl radicals and these radicals can react with benzoic acid to form low levels of benzene, says FSANZ.
The World Health Organization guideline for benzene in drinking water is 10 parts per billion and the US Environmental Protection Agency has established a guidelines level in drinking water of 5 parts per billion.
FSANZ plans to release a fact sheet on benzene in soft drinks on its website within a week to 10 days.
Chemical mixtures 
Dr Kate Hughes, a Sydney-based consultant on toxics to government and other organisations, says the response from FSANZ is "disappointing".
"It doesn't really matter whether it's 10 parts per billion or whatever," says Hughes, a former toxics campaigner. "The point is it's there and it's not meant to be there in a food."
She says studies by US scientists have shown that a mixture of small amounts of chemicals in the food chain affect the development of children.
Hughes says that it s also significant that the presence of benzene is an unanticipated reaction between a food additive and vitamin C.
She says it points to the creation of something that can be more toxic than the original two chemicals.
Hughes says although there are now thousands of published examples of such synergistic reactions, health authorities do not generally consider them.
"In the real world hazardous chemicals usually don't come by themselves, they usually come in mixtures," says Hughes.

Given a choice, goats like the taste of truffles, onions, apples and garlic. But when faced with oranges, like these ones on the Greek island of Crete, they just can't refuse
Goats and sheep prefer the taste of truffles, according to a new study that shows these ruminants have a wide palate with some suprising favourite flavours.
The study, published in the May issue of the journal Small Ruminant Research, found that while sheep and goats have similar tastes, sheep have a more discriminating palate.
"Flavour does appear to be more important to sheep than to goats," says Australian co-author and CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems researcher Professor Iain Gordon.
"We didn't test why this is the case, but it may be because goats generally have a more catholic [varied] diet than do sheep in the natural world, and so will eat a range of things with different flavours."
In order of preference, sheep enjoy truffle, garlic, onion, apple, caramel, maple and orange flavours, according to the new research. Goats prefer truffle, onion, apple and garlic.
Gordon and his colleagues recruited 10 male Scottish blackface sheep (Ovis aries) and 10 male feral hybrid goats (Capra hircus) as taste testers.
The researchers treated nutritionally-enhanced food pellets with a range of synthetic, human-grade flavourings, avoiding the bitter flavours goats and sheep tend to dislike.
After the animals fasted for an hour, the researchers presented basins containing the flavoured feeds for 30 minutes.
By weighing each basin at the end of the taste test, the researchers determined how much food of each flavour the ruminants ate. 
Taking the taste test
Both sheep and goats chowed down on the more pungent, earthy flavoured feeds, shunning strawberries.
"My view regarding these flavours is that they are highly attractive, even though rare, because of health affects associated with consumption, for example anti-parasitic [action on] worms for garlic and onion," says Gordon.
He also explains that the researchers did not give real truffles, onions and other foods associated with the flavours to the animals because they wanted to study the animals' preferences for flavours alone, independent of nutritional content.
Dr Alan Duncan, a nutritional ecologist at The Macaulay Institute in Aberdeen, Scotland, says the flavour rankings "make sense".
"Both species tended to prefer flavours they might naturally encounter, such as the fungi-type truffle flavour and the onion and garlic flavours, which are found in the wild representatives of both cultivated vegetables," he says.
"The fruity flavours tended to be avoided, and this is unsurprising since fruits do not generally feature in the repertoire of natural foods encountered by ruminant herbivores.
"I was slightly surprised that sheep showed stronger preferences than goats. Sheep are predominantly a grazing animal, whereas goats readily consume shrubs and woody vegetation."
Now that these preferences are known, Gordon and Duncan suggest, the flavours might be added to feed to encourage livestock to eat, particularly when new foods are introduced.

We had sex with you? No!
Our early ancestors interbred with chimpanzees after the two species drew apart millions of years ago, a new paper suggests. 
The provocative idea is sketched by US genome experts, who have discovered that hominids and chimps diverged far more recently, and over a much longer timescale, than anyone had thought.
During this time, the authors theorise, the two primates were rather more than kissing cousins: they had sex, swapping genes before making a final separation. 
"The ... analysis revealed big surprises, with major implications for human evolution," says Professor Eric Lander, director of the Broad Institute of Harvard University  and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and co-author of the paper in today's issue of the journal Nature. 
Until now, the belief was that humans and chimpanzees shared a common ancestor but went their separate ways around 6.5-7.4 million years ago. 
The basis for this is a carbon-dated fossil called Toumai, whose supporters say is the oldest known human. Its critics, though, dismiss Toumai as an ape. 
The estimate is also backed by the molecular clock, a method of calculating evolution on the basis of the speed at which genes mutate. 
Previous molecular-clock studies have focused on the average genetic difference between human and chimp. 
But the new paper takes a different approach. 
Looking at DNA
Exploiting the mountain of data that has come from the human and chimpanzee genome projects, the researchers compared the genetic codes of the two species as they are today.
They then estimated the various age of key sequences, rather than the overall average. 
They believe that the two species made their split no later than 6.3 million years ago and probably less than 5.4 million years ago. In other words, around 1 to 2 million years earlier than the Toumai estimate.
Moreover, speciation of chimp and hominid, the process by which they emerged as separate species, took an extraordinary long time: around four million years in all.
The youngest chromosome in the human genome is the X, which helps determine gender. On average, X is around 1.2 million years more recent than the 22 non-sex chromosomes, the scientists found. 
Lander describes X's tender age as "an evolutionary 'smoking gun'". 
Sex chromososmes
Previous studies suggest that sex chromosomes are among the most vulnerable of chromosomes when it comes to interbreeding. This is because co-mingling places its genes under swift selective pressure. 
Thus something unusual must have happened on the way to speciation: an initial split between human and chimp, followed by interbreeding, whose results show up in progressive younger genes, and then a final separation. 
Lead author Dr Nick Patterson, also at the Broad Institute, says that Toumai's claimed status as humans' ancestor has been somewhat clouded. 
"It is possible that the Toumai fossil is more recent than previously thought. But if the dating is correct, [it] would precede the human-chimp split," he says. 
"The fact that it has human-like features suggest that human-chimp speciation may have occurred over a long period with episodes of hybridisation [inter-breeding] between the emerging species." 
A gradual divergence of species through hybridisation, rather than a quick break, may be far more common than we suspect. 
"That such evolutionary events have not been seen more often in animal species may simply be due to the fact that we have not been looking for them," says the team's senior author, Assistant Professor David Reich, also of the Broad Institute.

The last human chromosome to be sequenced, chromosome 1, is the biggest and contains the most genes
Scientists have reached a landmark point in one of the world's most important scientific projects by sequencing the last chromosome in the human genome.
Chromosome 1 contains nearly twice as many genes as the average chromosome and makes up 8% of the human genetic code.
It is packed with 3141 genes and linked to 350 illnesses including cancer, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease, according to a report today in the journal Nature. 
"This achievement effectively closes the book on an important volume of the Human Genome Project," says Dr Simon Gregory who headed the sequencing project at the UK's Sanger Institute.
The project started in 1990 to identify the genes and DNA sequences that provide a blueprint for human beings.
Chromosome 1 is the biggest and contains, per chromosome, the greatest number of genes. 
"Therefore it is the region of the genome to which the greatest number of diseases have been localised," adds Gregory.
The sequence of chromosome 1 took an international team of 150 scientists 10 years to complete.
Researchers around the world will be able to mine the data to improve diagnostics and treatments for cancers, autism, mental disorders and other illnesses.  
Final chapter
The human genome has about 20,000 to 25,000 genes and the sequencing of chromosome 1 has led to the identification of more than 1000 new ones. 
 "We are moving into the next phase which will be working out what the genes do and how they interact," says Gregory.
The genetic map of chromosome 1 has already been used to identify a gene for a common form of cleft lip and palate. It will also improve understanding of what processes lead to genetic diversity in populations, Gregory says.
The scientists also identified 4500 new SNPs, single nucleotide polymorphisms, variations in human DNA that make people unique.
SNPs contain clues about why some people are susceptible to diseases like cancer or malaria, the best way to diagnose and treat them and how they will respond to drugs.

Could the hobbit really be one of us after all? 
Scientists who argue the hobbit is really just a modern human with a small brain have published evidence for the first time in a major scientific journal.
Today's issue of the journal Science carries a paper led by primate evolution expert, Dr Bob Martin of The Field Museum in Chicago, which says Homo floresiensis is likely to have been a modern human who suffered from microcephaly, a condition that causes a small brain.
This reignites the debate about whether the remains of the small hominid from the Indonesian island of Flores is really H. sapiens or a dwarf version of H. erectus that evolved after becoming isolated on the island, as was originally suggested.
Martin's team says that based on standard models of dwarfing, the hobbit's brain size is way too small to be that of a dwarf.
It also argues the tools found alongside the hobbit are far too advanced to have been made by anyone but H. sapiens.
"If you look at the history of stone tools around the world Homo erectus never made tools like that," says Martin.
"I've been in this business for 30 years and I really smell a rat in this," he says. "I don't think the standard story can be right and people are eventually going to see this."
His team also rejects findings of a study published last year that found the brain of H. floresiensis was unlike that of a microcephalic human.
Martin says the study, led by brain evolution expert Professor Dean Falk of Florida State University, compared the hobbit with only one microcephalic, which he now says is a child, when the researchers should have been comparing it with a microcephalic adult.
Martin's team describes the brains of two adult microcephalic specimens, a male from India and a female from Lesotho, it says are similar to the hobbit's.

Planetary system around the star HD 69830, with its three Neptune-sized planets and an asteroid belt
Scientists looking for planets around stars beyond the Sun have found a system that contains an asteroid belt and three Neptune-sized worlds, one of which orbits in a zone where liquid surface water could exist.
Although the planet's location could theoretically support life, researchers believe it is wrapped in an extensive hydrogen atmosphere and probably not suitable for life as we know it.
Nevertheless the finding, which is reported in the latest issue of the issue Nature, is considered a key development in the continuing push to find Earth-like worlds elsewhere in the universe.
The trio of planets circle HD 69830, a pale Sun-like star about 41 light-years away in the constellation Puppis. 
Astronomers using the infrared Spitzer Space Telescope previously discovered that HD 69830 probably has an asteroid belt in orbit. If true, the star would be the first similar in mass and age to the Sun to have one.
The researchers also predicted that a planet's gravitational tug was helping to keep the belt in order. 
With that hint and a sophisticated light-splitting spectrograph on the European Space Agency's 3.6-metre telescope in La Silla in Chile, astronomers spent two years studying miniscule wobbles in the star's orbit.
Through the telescope
They found three planets orbiting within the same distance that Earth orbits the Sun.
Surprisingly, the hunt turned up no sign of a large Jupiter-class planet, making HD 69830 the first extrasolar planetary system without a massive planet.
"The planetary system around HD 69830 clearly represents a Rosetta stone in our understanding of how planets form," says co-author Professor Michel Mayor, a Swiss astronomer from the Observatory of Geneva.
"No doubt it will help us better understand the huge diversity we have observed since the first extra-solar planet was found 11 years ago."
Hunting for more planets
Although HD 69830's planets are still 10 to 18 times bigger than Earth, the discovery is encouraging to researchers who are refining their planet-hunting techniques to find smaller, more Earth-like worlds.
"It implies that further low-mass planets will be spotted orbiting other stars," writes Harvard University astronomer Professor David Charbonneau in a related article in Nature.
Computer simulations indicate the innermost planet is probably rocky, like Earth.
The middle one is a combination of rock and gas and the outer planet, which is the one predicted to lie in the zone of habitability, is estimated to have a rocky-ice core and a massive envelope of gas.
Researchers believe the system is stable.

Blowflies have an inbuilt natural resistance to some organophosphate insecticides, scientists show
Scientists have used crushed fly legs that are 70 years old to solve the riddle of why insects evolve rapid resistance to pesticides.
DNA extracted from the fly legs shows that Australian sheep blowflies have an existing, advantageous genetic characteristic that allows them to resist certain insecticides.
The research features online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Blowflies have long created headaches for Australian sheep farmers because they lay their eggs in faecal matter around the sheep's tail, causing blowfly 'strike'.
The pesticide diazinon was introduced into Australia in the 1950s as a sheep 'dip' to combat the problem. But within six years blowflies developed a high level of resistance to it.
Researchers from CSIRO Entomology in Canberra and collaborators from New Zealand and the UK wanted to see if the blowflies had a pre-adaptation resistance to the insecticide.
This would explain why they developed resistance so rapidly.
To do this CSIRO's Dr Carol Hartley and colleagues gathered 150 samples, kept at the Australian National Insect Collection, of 70-year-old blowfly legs from two Australian sheep blowflies Lucilia cuprina and its close relative L. sericata.
They then crushed them and extracted their DNA.
The researchers compared the state of blowflies' resistance genes before and after the introduction of the pesticide.
"We didn't find any diazinon resistance in the old fly legs, whereas it occurs in the present day species. That tells us that in the case of the diazinon pesticide there was no pre-adaptation."
But when the researchers conducted the same experiment with another pesticide malathion, they found resistance genes both in the old blowflies and the modern blowflies, showing there was pre-existing resistance.
"This is evidence for pre-adaptation as a mechanism of evolution of insecticide resistance," says Hartley.
She says it is this pre-existing resistance that let resistance to organophosphate insecticides take off so rapidly. The specific diazinon resistance gene developed later.
"We used the DNA from the very old flies to show that one form of the alteration already existed in the flies from 70 years ago, long before they had ever been exposed to the organophosphate chemicals," Hartley says.
"It was this that allowed the flies to rapidly develop resistance to the organophosphate chemicals in general, after which the better version of the mutation took over in the flies."
She says while the research mainly tells us about the mechanism of evolution  and how it occurred in these particular blowfly species, it also gives a clue to why rapid evolution of resistance can occur.
This might help researchers predict potential insecticide resistance in the future, she says.

Shampoos, sunscreens, toothpastes, anti-aging creams and other personal care products contain nanomaterials, a new report says
Consumers are using cosmetics and toiletries that contain unregulated and untested nanomaterials, says a new report.
The report released this week by Friends of the Earth (FOE), documents 116 products it says contain nanoparticles, a large number of which are available to Australians either in stores or online.
"We believe this represents a small fraction of the number of products that are actually on the market," says Georgia Miller of the FOE nanotechnology project.
Products listed in the report include well-known brands such as L'Or&eacute;al, Revlon, Clinique, Chanel and Estée Lauder, says Miller.
The Nanomaterials, sunscreens and cosmetics: small ingredients, big risks report is based on publicly available information from manufacturers of the products or ingredients, or retailers, says Miller.
Nanoparticles are generally those under 100 nanometres across and manufacturers are not required to label products containing them. 
There is some concern among scientists that such tiny particles may have toxic characteristics, yet there is limited scientific information available on their safety.
Among their concerns are whether creams and lotions containing nanoparticles can penetrate deep into the skin.
Skin deep?
The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), which regulates sunscreens in Australia, says the weight of current evidence is that nanoparticles used in sunscreens stay on the surface or in the outer dead layer of the skin.
But Miller points to the UK's Royal Society, which says the ability of nanoparticles to penetrate into the skin is still unclear.
Existing studies are inadequate, says Miller, which is why there are numerous studies on skin penetration being carried out in the US and Europe.
"We think the TGA's conclusion is very premature and irresponsible," says Miller.
Some manufacturers promote deeper skin penetration as a feature of their nanoparticle-enhanced products, she says, pointing to anti-ageing wrinkle creams that contain fullerenes, nanoscale carbon spheres.
"They are promoting their use of fullerenes as a positive attribute because they claim that fullerenes enable much deeper penetration into the skin of the anti-ageing ingredients," she says.
"In a lot of instances it's the very properties that are attractive to cosmetics manufacturers, for example the ability to penetrate deeper in the skin, that are of concern to us."
She says a 2004 US scientific study found fullerenes can cause brain damage in fish, kill water fleas, and are toxic to human liver cells even in low doses.
Cosmetics regulator welcomes report
Deborah Willcocks of the National Industrial Chemicals Notification and Assessment (NICNAS), which regulates cosmetics in Australia, says her organisation is "particularly pleased" to see the FOE report. 
She says NICNAS called on industry in February this year to provide data on what nanomaterials were being used and in what volume. 
"The Friends of the Earth report is the first time we've actually seen some published information on what products might be on the market out there," she says. "It's a good help to us."
Willcocks says more data is required before NICNAS can determine if nanomaterials have unique toxicological properties compared ito materials with a larger particle size.
She says NICNAS is meeting with its industry committee today and is proposing to set up a working group with industry and the community to develop a strategy on how to deal with nanomaterials.
"We are concerned, that's why we're actually working on this very actively," Willcocks says.
The body representing Australia's cosmetics industry, ACCORD Australasia, says it has only just become aware of the FOE report.
Executive director Bronywn Capanna says ACCORD and its member companies would co-operate with the regulatory agencies should the report raise any relevant significant issues.
She says examples of nanotechnology used in cosmetics and personal care products include nanoemulsions, nano-pigments and sunblocks, and nanocapsules.
Calls for a moratorium
The UK's Royal Society recommends nanoparticles be tested and assessed as new chemicals.
But regulators say it is too early to say whether specific safety tests are required.
Meanwhile, FOE is seeking a moratorium on the production and sale of products containing nanomaterials.
"Our call is for a halt to the further release of products that contain nanomaterials until such time as we have done the safety assessment and we've got regulations in place to manage the risks," Miller says.
The Public Health Association of Australia supports FOE's call for a moratorium.
"[There is also no] surveillance going on to see if anything does arise out of the use of nanotechnology in things like cosmetics and sunscreens," says executive director Pieta Laut.

Fossil tracks left by medium-sized wading birds. The depth and condition of the tracks indicate that the substrate was still very wet when these birds walked on the surface
Scientists have found what they say is the first evidence of prehistoric wading birds probing for food.
The depressions and footprints were found at Alaska's Denali National Park and Preserve in rocks scientists say were formed from freshwater sediments 65 million to 70 million years ago. 
Such evidence of prehistoric birds' feeding behaviour is difficult to find because the marks made in the mud disappear easily and the fossilised evidence often erodes, says Phil Brease, a geologist at the park.
Geologists discovered the tracks and marks last year. At first, they thought they were impressions left by raindrops.
But after studying photographs and moulds, they determined they were depressions left by birds' beaks.
The scientists say the depth and condition of the marks suggests the area was still very wet when the birds walked on the surface.
They presented their findings at a recent Geological Society of America conference in Anchorage.
Denali National Park is emerging to be a rich source of fossils.
A team of geologists has also discovered a fossilised footprint of a three-toed, meat-eating dinosaur.
This theropod would have roamed the area about 70 million years ago, the scientists say.

Glowing plasma inside a fusion test reactor
Physicists say they have cracked a problem facing nuclear fusion, touted as the cheap, safe, clean and almost limitless energy source of the future.
The US researchers say they have found a way to cut down erosion of the metal reactor wall, which would be a crucial step to improving efficiency.
They publish their work online today in the journal Nature Physics.
In fusion, atomic nuclei are fused together to release energy, as opposed to fission, the technique used for nuclear power and atomic bombs, where nuclei are split. 
In a fusion reactor, particles are rammed together to form the charged gas plasma, contained inside a doughnut-shaped chamber called a tokamak, by powerful magnetic coils. 
A consortium of countries signed a deal last year to build the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) in southern France as a testbed for an eventual commercial design. 
But many experts have been shaking their heads at the many challenges facing the ITER designers. 
One challenge has been the phenomenon of edge localised modes, or ELMs, sudden fluxes or eddies in the outer edge of the plasma that erode the reaction chamber's inner wall.
The tokamak's inner wall is an expensive metal skin that absorbs neutrons emitted from the plasma. And erosion would mean that the wall would have to be replaced more often.
Eroded particles also have a big impact on the plasma performance, diminishing the amount of energy it can deliver. 
A team led by Todd Evans of General Atomics, California, believes that the problematic ELMs can be cleverly controlled. 
The scientists found that a small resonant magnetic field, derived from special coils located inside a reactor vessel, creates 'chaotic' magnetic interference on the plasma edge, which stops the fluxes from forming. 
The experiments were conducted at the General Atomics' DIII-D National Fusion Facility, a tokamak in San Diego.
Nuclear fusion is the same process used by the Sun to radiate energy. In the case of our star, hydrogen atoms are forced together to produce helium.
On Earth, the fusion would take place in a reactor fuelled by two istopes of hydrogen, deuterium and tritium, with helium as the waste product. 
Deuterium is present in seawater, which would make it a virtually limitless resource. Tritium would be derived from irradiating the plentiful element lithium in the fusion vessel.
The US$12.8 billion (A$21.6 billion) ITER scheme entails building the largest tokamak in the world at Cadarache, near the southern French city of Marseille. 
The partners are the European Union, the US, Japan, Russia, China, India and South Korea. 
It is designed to be a testbed of fusion technologies, with a construction period of about 10 years and an operational lifespan of 20 years. 
If ITER works, a prototype commercial reactor would be built, and if that works, fusion technology would be rolled out across the world. 
Other problems facing fusion technology include the challenge of creating a self-sustaining plasma and efficiently containing the plasma so that charged particles do not leak out. 
In existing tokamaks, no one has achieved a self-sustaining fusion event for longer than about five seconds, and at the cost of using up far more energy than is yielded. 
A huge jolt of heat of nearly 100 million&deg;C is needed to kick-start the process, which then has to be sustained by tiny amounts of fuel pellets.

Today's satellite is tomorrow's space junk. But is it worth preserving?
Plans to spring-clean space junk orbiting Earth could result in the loss of irreplaceable historical artefacts, an archaeologist warns.
Dr Alice Gorman of Flinders University in Adelaide, an Australian researcher who has previously called for space junk to be World Heritage listed, is on a mission to preserve what she says are heritage items in space.
She plans to take that mission to the Australian Space Development Conference in Canberra in July and to the World Archaeological Congress in Jamaica next year.
Gorman says as space agencies prepare to de-clutter potentially dangerous space junk, it's time to assess the value of some of the millions of objects currently orbiting Earth.
"There are a number of proposals being put forth by a number agencies and [space junk] is recognised as a very serious problem," says Gorman, who is co-chair of the World Archaeological Congress Space Heritage Taskforce.
"There's a window of time now where we can plan to do it right."
Culling the clutter
Space junk ranges from tiny scraps just millimetres in size to whole satellites.
NASA, the European Space Agency and some private organisations are already developing plans to remove it, Gorman says.
While some space junk undergoes an "automatic clean-up regime" by burning up when it re-enters the atmosphere, other items need to be physically removed.
Current proposals include using ground-based lasers to put objects off orbit and speed the rate of their burn-up, sending out 'space tugs' as roving garbage collectors or using tethers to rope and haul in bits of space debris.
"To make that effective you have to be able to discriminate between what's junk and what's not," Gorman says.
Among the items that should recognised for their heritage value are the Vanguard One satellite, launched in 1958 and the oldest human object in space, and FedSat, the Australian designed and built satellite.
Preserving items like these could provide evidence of a nation's presence in space or help reconstruct a history of space exploration, she says.
Woomera
Gorman will present a report on the management of space junk at the World Archaeological Congress next May.
"It will outline ... the heritage of space exploration, what mechanisms exist to manage [space junk], legal boundaries and which sites might be considered part of that heritage," she says.
One of those sites is Woomera, in South Australia, which she says "played a part in a bygone era in Australia".
"And in terms of the development of space exploration it has a much more than local significance," she says.

Scarecrows have moved away from the veggie patch. Hi-tech scarecrows are now scaring birds away from fish farms, with help from the web and a mobile phone
A computerised scarecrow could be the next defence against unwanted birds, its US developers say.
The Intelligent Scarecrow, designed by computer science and engineering students at the University of South Florida in Tampa, uses a computer, an internet camera and imaging software to detect birds around fish ponds.
In response, the scarecrow makes loud noises or powerful bursts of water to scare the birds away.
Fish farmers go to great lengths and sometimes expense to keep fish-eating birds at bay.
Deterrents include everything from tethered balloons, netting and bird-chasing dogs to propane cannons, pyrotechnics and motion-sensitive sprinklers.
But most methods don't work well, are expensive or loud. 
The Intelligent Scarecrow is dressed in like an American football player, with helmet and baggy jersey. But it is brains, not brawn, that make it a threat.
The helmet conceals an internet-enabled videocamera that takes in a wide field of view, which can be accessed via a website. A microprocessor with image processing software the students wrote scans for colour and shape differences between frames.
If the software sees bright orange, it will not trigger a response. So a farmer wearing a bright orange vest can tend crops without being seen as a threat. 
But other changes trigger sprinklers to the right and left of the scarecrow to shoot out powerful jets of water up to 9 metres.
Blasting the birds
The device can also blast loud sounds, such as a shotgun noise or the cry of a predatory hawk, through nearby speakers.
And because it's internet-enabled, the scarecrow can send a text message to a mobile phone or an email to a computer alerting the farmer of threats.
"As far as the bird is concerned, this thing is intelligent," says Associate Professor Ken Christensen, who oversaw the students' development of the Intelligent Scarecrow.
But the scarecrow may have a long way to go before it stands post over a pond, says Craig Watson, director of the Tropical Research Laboratory at the University of Florida in Ruskin.
"The area it would cover is not practical with a 10- to 100-acre fish farm," he says. 
And unless the scarecrow can move around regularly, the birds will become accustomed to it and no longer see it as a threat.
Christensen and his students are now working to extend the scarecrow's predator detection range and water-spraying accuracy and range.

Solar roof tiles would provide an alternative to conventional solar panel systems
A roof tile that harnesses solar energy to heat water and generate electricity, has been invented by an Australian industrial designer.
The plastic tile is filled with solar cells and connects to a house's hot water system and electrical wiring.
Sebastian Braat, a graduate of the University of Western Sydney, says the tiles are designed with urban dwellings in mind - particularly the new generation of so-called "McMansion" style suburban homes. 
"My project is focussing on getting the technology into the city and easing the power burden our housing estates are rapidly creating," he says.
The tiles consist of a clear polycarbonate chassis containing a water vessel and photovoltaic cells.
The tiles can be manufactured to match a variety of roof tile styles.
Between 12 and 18% of thermal energy that hits the cells is converted into electricity. The remainder is used to heat the water.
Braat says he runs a coolant through the water in the tiles, which goes to a heat exchanger. The heat exchanger transfers the heat to a regular hot water storage tank.
Creating an energy surplus
Meanwhile, the solar cells generate electricity as direct current that goes to an inverter connected to the house's power box, which remains connected to the electricity grid.
 "The idea of being grid connected is that you generate loads more power than you need during the day and that gets fed back into the grid," he says.
"That means the house in effect is generating its own power and generating the excess into the grid.
"If the house uses more than it generates the user gets charged, if not they get a credit from the power company."
How many tiles does it take?
Braat says it takes about 200 tiles to generate a maximum of 1.5 kilowatts - more than enough for an average three-bedroom suburban house over a year.
Dr Dong Chen, a research scientist with CSIRO Manufacturing and Infrastructure Technology, who wasn't involved in the design, says it makes sense to use roof tiles, or any exposed parts of a house, for solar heating.
He says Braat may need to look at how efficient the tiles are, and the pitch of the roof may affect this.
Chen says the inventor will also need to look at the cost of the tiles, including their maintenance, and how safe they are.
He says it's also possible the roof could leak because the tiles may involve a number of small joints.

Artificial sweeteners accelerate the emptying of the stomach and increase the rate at which alcohol is absorbed
Alcoholic drinks made with artificial sweeteners lead to a high rate of alcohol absorption, resulting in a greater blood alcohol concentration than from drinks made with sugar-based mixers, a new study has found.
The reason, according to an Australian team' led by Dr Chris Rayner of the Royal Adelaide Hospital, is the accelerated emptying of the stomach caused by artificial sweetening agents.
Rayner presented his team's research at this week's Digestive Disease Week meeting in Los Angeles.
"Today, more and more people are shifting personal preferences by choosing 'diet' drinks as a healthier alternative," says Rayner. 
"What people do not understand is the potential side effects that diet mixed alcoholic drinks may have on their body's response to alcohol."
Rayner and team studied eight healthy male volunteers. 
On one day, the subjects consumed an orange-flavoured vodka drink made from alcohol and a mixer sweetened with sugar containing 478 calories.
On the second day, the men drank the same amount of alcohol with a diet mixer containing 225 calories. 
The researchers measured the rate of stomach emptying using ultrasound technology and took blood samples at 30-minute intervals for three hours.
The time to empty half of the diet drink from the stomach was 21 minutes, compared to regular drinks which took 36 minutes for the same degree of emptying. 
Peak blood alcohol concentrations were substantially greater with diet drinks at an average of 0.05%, while regular drinks measured at 0.03% blood alcohol concentration.
"It was surprising how much of a difference the artificial sweetener made," Rayner says. 
Rayner says these drinks also tend to be consumed at times other than meal times, when food would slow gastric emptying.
He recommends that product labelling include information on the intoxicating qualities of artificially sweetened alcoholic drinks. 
There could be legal implications for those driving home, as well, he notes.

Before the Big Bang could have been a previous universe a lot like our own, that first collapsed and then inflated into the universe we have today
The Big Bang may have been a Big Bounce, say theorists searching for what preceded the birth of our own universe.
If their new mathematical simulations are correct, what came before the Big Bang was a previous universe a lot like our own. It collapsed on itself, then some weird physics caused it to inflate into the universe we have today.
Physicist Dr Abhay Ashtekar of Pennsylvania State University and team publish their results in a recent issue of Physical Review Letters.
What has blocked the pre-Big Bang view from theoreticians was the mathematical expression of what was happening - based on certain assumptions about space-time. 
The problem was the calculations kept ramming up against infinity. When that happens, equations fail.
"It's like having an impenetrable wall," says Ashtekar. "When it comes to infinity we cannot, in physics, go beyond it."
Space-time is a model that combines three-dimensional space and one-dimensional time into a single unit called the space-time continuum. In this continuum, time is considered the fourth dimension.
What was becoming infinite in scientists' calculations was the curvature of the space-time continuum as you near the time when everything in the universe and all the gravity was concentrated into a single point.
Gravity shreds fabric of space-time
The pre-Big Bang gravity basically shredded the space-time fabric and left only the physics of atoms - quantum physics - to work with.
To peer into that unimaginable crush, Ashtekar and colleagues started gain without assuming that the "fabric" of space-time continuum existed in the earliest moments of the universe. 
"The general belief is that the continuum may be just an approximation," says Ashtekar. "This is something even Einstein said."
Instead, the team applied what's called loop quantum gravity, a strategy that has been developed to join quantum physics with Einstein's General Relativity. 
Quantum theory suggests Big Crunch
According to loop quantum gravity, the fabric of space is made of discrete and identical one-dimensional quantum threads. At the Big Bang, the fabric is a shredded mess and only these threads can be followed further back.
Using this concept, the researchers concluded that a previous universe collapsed in on itself in a gigantic gravitational Big Crunch. 
Then, when the density of that crunch reached super astronomical values, gravity flipped into a repulsive force - another weird outcome of this physics - and inflated the new universe in which we live.
"It's long been speculated that as you get to the Big Bang, quantum theory was going to be important," says physicist Dr Jorge Pullin of Louisiana State University. 
It's also been speculated that if you could work out the equations, you'd probably see that the Big Bang was a Big Bounce, he says.
But this is the first time that anyone has actually done a thorough job working through the physics back through the Big Bang, he says.
Previous universe elusive
As for what it tells us about the previous universe, it's not much, says Pullin. "The only thing you can conclude is that the bounce occurs," he says.
That's not to say we will never learn more about the earlier universe.
Astronomers are discovering patterns in the cosmic background radiation that appear to be the inflated remnants of electron-sized irregularities in the first instant of the Big Bang. 
Could those irregularities, combined with loop quantum gravity, reveal patterns inherited from the earlier universe?
"There may be certain hints left behind," says Pullin.

The biological clock ticks for both men as well as women
A man's fertility appears to decline after the age of 40, in much the same way that a woman's ability to conceive fades after 35, say French researchers. 
Dr Elise de La Rochebrochard and team, from the French national health institute INSERM, report their findings in the May issue of the journal Fertility and Sterility.
Their study, of nearly 2,000 couples undergoing fertility treatment, found that pregnancy attempts were 70% more likely to fail when the man was age 40 or older than if he were younger than 30, regardless of his wife's age. 
"As an increasing number of couples choose to postpone child-bearing, they should be informed that paternal age over 40 years is an important risk factor for failure to conceive," say de La Rochebrochard and team.
Because all the women in the study were completely sterile and undergoing in vitro fertilisation (IVF), the age of the fathers was key. 
And while past studies have suggested that older men are less likely to father children, the extent to which this was related to biological changes or to decreased sexual activity has been unclear. 
"Our results provide, for the first time, strong evidence for a paternal age effect on failure to conceive that is linked only to biological male ageing," the researchers say. 
According to the researchers, the lower IVF success rate among relatively older men may be due to poorer-quality sperm. 
It has long been known that women are less likely to conceive after the age of 35 than before, say the researchers
But the current findings, they say, suggest that for men, the age of 40 is similarly important.
"In reproduction," the researchers conclude, "age must no longer be considered as the concern of the woman, but as that of the couple."

The new research supports the idea that there's more to heredity than DNA
Genetic instructions can be carried from one generation to the next in RNA, a mouse experiment by French researchers suggests.
Dr Minoo Rassoulzadegan, of the University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, and team report their findings in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"This is the first demonstration of RNA-induced transmission of heredity," Rassoulzadegan says.
RNA, or ribonucleic acid, is a single-strand molecule that plays a key role in making proteins in animals by transferring and translating genetic information encoded in DNA.
But Rassoulzadegan and team have now found that it is capable of much more.
Spotty mutant mice surprise scientists
They engineered laboratory mice to have a variation in a gene called Kit. The variation gave the mice white spots on their tails. 
The mice concerned had a mutant version and a normal version in the two copies of their Kit gene.
The researchers crossed these heterozygous mice and examined the offspring.
Some of the offspring had both copies of the normal Kit genes, yet, remarkably, they also had the white spots. 
The researchers also found that the white spots were transmitted to the next generation of mice, even though these rodents also had the normal genes. 
A challenge to Mendel's laws
The findings challenge the laws of inheritance, set down in the 19th century by Austrian monk Gregor Mendel. According to these, offspring can only get the genetic code exactly as it is handed on from their parents. 
By all rights, if the mice both had normal Kit genes, their tails should have been reassuringly spotless. 
Rassoulzadegan suggests the answer to this mystery lies in RNA. 
The mutant version of Kit produces unexpectedly large numbers of aberrantly-sized "messenger" RNA, she found. 
In addition, the sperm of mutant mice also, surprisingly, was found to have accumulations of RNA. 
Intrigued by this, her team injected RNA from mutant cells into normal embryos and, presto, spotted-tail mice were born.
RNA carried in sperm acts as gene silencer
The hypothesis is that RNA is carried in the mouse's sperm, and at fertilisation it "silences" the activity of the normal Kit gene. This happens not only in the offspring but in subsequent generations too.
Back in 1956, an American biologist called R. Alexander Brink became the first to suggest "paramutation", in which an order issued by one set of genes was remembered in ensuing generations, even though the gene itself was not subsequently handed on in reproduction.
But the phenomenon has only been seen in lab plants, not in mammals. In addition, it occurs only very rarely, apparently as a result of interaction between the two copies of a gene. Normally, the pair of genes operate independently. 
Caution urged before rewriting rule book
In a commentary on Rassoulzadegan's research, also carried in  Nature, Dr Paul Soloway of Cornell University, New York, stresses caution, saying that her findings have to be replicated by others before Mendel's rule book has to be rewritten. 
And, he says, the mechanism by which the transmitted RNA works remains unclear. 
But if the work is validated, the way is open for a rethink on how RNA could influence the transmision of heredity diseases, metabolism and even types of "imprinted" behaviour from distant generations.

Scientists have found the centre in the brain that controls your ability to wiggle your ears
Human ears can wiggle as well as produce their own sounds, and now researchers have a better understanding of how these unusual processes work.
Since ear wiggling involves complex coordination of facial muscles, research on it could shed light on related disorders, such as Bell's palsy, which can cause facial paralysis.
The research into sounds made by the ear, meanwhile, is surprisingly illuminating when it comes to gender and sexuality issues.
It turns out heterosexual men and women and homosexual women appear to produce different levels of ear noise.
Ear wiggling
While most of us produce sound from our ears, the ability to wiggle them in a controlled and detectable way is not as common.
"The mechanism behind ear movements is sophisticated," says Bastiaan ter Meulen, who led the ear wiggling study, accepted for publication in the journal Clinical Neurophysiology.
Unlike other facial muscles, ear muscles have their own accessory nucleus, a control area for muscle function, in the brainstem, says ter Meulen, a researcher at Erasmus MC, a university medical centre in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
"Compared to animals, especially bats and cats, this nucleus is rather small in humans," he says.
He says that a muscle involved in eye movement also directly controls ear motion. That's why when we look left or right, our ears slightly withdraw on both sides.
Breathing and swallowing are also linked to ear movement through muscles and neuronal pathways.
Ter Meulen and team made these determinations after conducting an EEG, or brain wave test, on a 43-year-old woman who lost consciousness and experienced rhythmic bursts of ear movement.
Their study marks the first time such ear muscle activity has ever been documented in an EEG.
Noisy ears
Another team of researchers analysed noises made by the inner ear that are like echoes that occur in response to clicks, such as pencil tapping, or distortion, such as a bad radio signal.
Dr Dennis McFadden, a professor of psychology at the  University of Texas at Austin, and his colleagues, measured the strength of these otoacoustic emissions, or ear-produced sounds, in rhesus monkeys and spotted hyenas. 
Their studies have been accepted for publication in the journal Hormones and Behavior.
The scientists found that, as for humans, the sounds were stronger in females. During the breeding season, the differences between the male and female ear sounds became even more pronounced, suggesting that hormones affect the emissions.
Because male and female spotted hyenas are more androgynous when young, the researchers expected that their otoacoustic emissions would be similar. 
As predicted, measurements of the echo-like ear sounds obtained from nine male and seven female hyenas were similar.
Sexual orientation factor
In a prior study, McFadden found that the sounds produced in the inner ears of homosexual and bisexual women were weaker than those emitted from the ears of heterosexual women.
Since men also exhibit weaker echo-like sounds in the inner ear, MdFadden says the results suggest the inner ear and some unknown brain structures may play a role in sexual preference.
"The inner ear may be a valuable non-invasive window into events that occur during brain development and sexual differentiation," he says.

Researchers used chimp poop to confirm the origin of HIV
The closest viral relative to HIV has been traced, for the first time, to wild chimpanzees, confirming the theory that these creatures are the original source of AIDS.
A team led by Dr Beatrice Hahn of the University of Alabama at Birmingham report their study of wild chimpanzees from southern Cameroon, in today's issue the journal Science.
"It says that the chimpanzee group that gave rise to HIV ... this chimp community resides in Cameroon," says Hahn, who has been studying the genetic origin of HIV for years.
In people, HIV leads to AIDS but chimps have a version called simian immune deficiency virus (SIV) that causes them no harm. 
To date SIV has been found in captive chimps but Hahn wanted to show it could be found in the wild, too.
Her international team got the cooperation of the government in Cameroon and they hired skilled trackers to locate the elusive chimps.
"It is hard to track them," says Hahn. 
But the trackers managed to collect 599 samples of droppings from the chimpanzee subspecies Pan troglodytes troglodytes.
Hahn's lab found viral DNA and evidence of the virus itself in the droppings and estimated the prevalence of SIV infection in the associated chimp populations.
"We went to 10 field sites and we found evidence of infection in five," Hahn says.
"We were able to identify a total of 16 infected chimps and we were able to get viral sequences from all of them."
Widespread infection
Up to 35% of the apes in some communities were infected with SIV and different varieties or "clades" of the virus were found. 
"We found some of the clades were really, really very closely related to the human virus and others were not," says Hahn. 
She says chimps separated by a river were infected with different clades,
And a river may have carried the virus into the human population. 
Cameroon not the origin of the epidemic
While SIV has been found in Cameroon the epidemic is known to have originated elsewhere.
"The epidemic took off in Kinshasa, in Brazzaville," says Hahn.
Kinshasa is in the Democratic Republic of Congo, formerly Zaire, and faces Brazzaville, in Congo, across the Congo River. 
Studies have traced HIV to a man who gave a blood sample in 1959 in Kinshasa, then called Leopoldville.
"So how do you get from southern Cameroon to the Democratic Republic of Congo?" Hahn asks. 
"Some human must have done so. There is a river that goes from that southeastern corner of Cameroon down to the Congo river." 
Ivory and hardwood traders used the Sangha River in the 1930s, when the original human-to-human transmission is believed to have happened. 
Transmission still a mystery
Hahn's study suggests the virus passed from chimpanzees to people more than once. 
"We don't really know how these transmissions occurred," Hahn says. 
"We know that you don't get it from petting a chimp, or from a toilet seat, just like you can't get HIV from a toilet seat," she says.
"It requires exposure to infected blood and infected body fluids. So if you get bitten by an angry chimp while you are hunting it, that could do it." 
Hahn and team's study only applies to the HIV group M, which is the main strain of the virus responsible for the AIDS pandemic. 
"It is quite possible that still other [chimpanzee SIV] lineages exist that could pose risks for human infection and prove problematic for HIV diagnostics and vaccines," Hahn and team say. 
AIDS was only identified 25 years ago. HIV now infects 40 million people around the world and has killed 25 million. 
Spread via blood, sexual contact and from mother to child during birth or breast-feeding, there is no vaccine against HIV although drug cocktails can help control it.

Should the tropics move another two or three degrees poleward the Sahara Desert could shift perhaps several hundred kilometres towards the poles, the researchers say
The tropical regions of the world have been expanding since 1979, say US climatologists, who say it is unclear whether the phenomenon is caused by global warming. 
Dr Thomas Reichler, a meteorology professor at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, and colleagues, report their findings in today's issue of the journal Science.
After analysing satellite temperature data collected between 1979 and 2005, researchers estimate that the tropics has expanded by two degrees of latitude, or 225 kilometres during that period. 
"It's a big deal," says Reichler. "The tropics may be expanding and getting larger."
The phenomenon could explain the increase in droughts and decrease in precipitation observed in recent years in the subtropical regions of southwestern United States and Europe's Mediterranean basin, the scientists say.
"The possible expansion of the tropics may be a totally new aspect of climate change," Reichler says. "We don't know for sure what triggered it." 
Besides global warming, another possible cause is the depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer due to pollutants such as refrigerant gases.
Jet streams play a key role
Meteorologists generally consider that the tropics lies between 30&deg;N and 30&deg;S.
Reichler and team found that in both hemispheres at these mid-latitudes, the lower atmosphere, or troposphere, has became warmer compared to other latitudes in the past 26 years, while the stratosphere has become cooler.
The researchers argue this change would have pushed each of the tropospheric jet streams - fast-moving wind currents that propel weather patterns - towards the poles.
"The jet streams mark the edge of the tropics, so if they are moving poleward that means the tropics are getting wider," says study co-author Dr John Wallace, an atmospheric sciences professor at the University of Washington in Seattle.
He says movement of the jet streams will have long-term impact on rainfall.
Should the tropics "move another two or three degrees poleward in this century," says Wallace, "very dry areas such as the Sahara Desert could nudge farther toward the pole, perhaps by a few hundred miles." 
Measurements
Reichler says the team used long satellite measurements of atmospheric temperatures to find the distinct pattern of warming. 
Weather balloons also provided independent confirmation of the satellite observation, he says.
The researchers say the mid-latitude tropospheric warming trend remained even after excluding the record mid-latitude temperatures in 1998, caused by the 1997 El Nino.

Metamaterials could create the ultimate optical illusion: invisibility - although it wouldn't quite look like this
New materials that can change the way light and other forms of radiation bend around an object may provide a way to make things invisible, say researchers.
Two separate teams of researchers report in today's issue the journal Science that experimental "metamaterials" could be used to hide an object from visible light, infrared light, microwaves and perhaps even sonar probes.
Their work suggests that science-fiction portrayals of invisibility, such as the cloaking devices used to hide space ships in Star Trek, might be truly possible. 
Harry Potter's cloak or The Invisible Man of films and fiction might be a bit harder to emulate, however, because the thing to be made invisible will have to be encased in a thick shell of metamaterials.
Metamaterials are composite structures that deliberately resemble nothing found in nature. 
They are engineered to have unusual properties, such as the ability to bend light in unique ways. 
"The [metamaterial] cloak would act like you've opened up a hole in space," says Dr David R. Smith, a professor of electrical and computer engineering at Duke University in North Carolina and co-author of one of the papers in Science.
"All light or other electromagnetic waves are swept around the area, guided by the metamaterial to emerge on the other side as if they had passed through an empty volume of space."
Unlike modern "stealth" bombers that bounce radar off their surfaces so they cannot be seen, an object could be encased in a shell of metamaterials.
"[It] would create an illusion akin to a mirage," says co-author Dr David Schurig, also of Duke University. 
Like all physics, the invisibility idea requires a little imagination. 
"Think of space as a woven cloth," says Shurig. 
"Imagine making a hole in the cloth by inserting a pointed object between the threads without tearing them." 
The light, or microwaves, or radar would travel along the threads of the cloth, ending up behind the object without having touched it. 
"You just need the right set of material properties and you can guide light," Shurig says. 
Defence project
The Duke University researchers started working on metamaterials with a grant from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). 
Such materials could provide super-light electronics in aircraft or cars, or highly efficient lenses. 
The researchers came up with the idea of using these materials to bend light and other electromagnetic radiation. 
"We are going to try to have an experimental demonstration of these effects. There are a few more steps to go. We are working on these steps," says Smith.
Shurig says anyone making such a cloak would have to choose what form of radiation one wanted invisibility from. 
Also, the invisibility would work both ways - a person hidden from the visible light spectrum would have to use infrared or sonar or microwaves to see out, he says. 
"If want to cover the whole visible spectrum that would a tall order," says Shurig.      
A second paper in Science, by UK-based professor of theoretical physics, Dr Ulf Leonhardt at the University of St Andrews, also proposes an invisibility device using metamaterials.

Light behaves in weird ways when you shine it through special materials
Light does something weird when you shift it into reverse, scientists say. It moves faster than the speed of light.
Two research teams independently reported the counter-intuitive behaviour, observed in two very different experiments, in a recent issue of the journal Science.
"This is just so mind-boggling that it cries out for attention," says Professor Robert Boyd, an optics expert at the University of Rochester in New York.
He and his colleagues triggered the odd trick using optical fibre laced with the element erbium, the same kind of fibre used in telecommunications.
They split a burst of laser light, sending one beam through the optical fibre and allowing the other to travel without interference.
Oddly enough, the first beam's peak exited the far end of the fibre way ahead of the peak of the comparison pulse.
Odder still, the exiting peak escaped even before the original peak had entered the fibre.
What had happened was that as soon as the leading edge of the original pulse entered the fibre, the fibre instantly cloned an identical pulse at the far end. That cloned peak exited before the rest of the original had been introduced.
At the same time, another cloned pulse fired backward through the fibre to cancel out the original.
So ultimately, one pulse entered and one emerged, but with timing that appeared to violate light's natural speed limit.
To test if the pulse was travelling backward as it seemed, the team shortened the fibre a few centimetres at a time and repeated the experiment.
By adding the experiments together in sequence, they watched the beam's backward progression.
The fibre itself, they conclude, instantly reconstructed the pulse at the far end, simultaneously sending another pulse backward.
Not once, but twice
German researchers made a similar observation in an independent experiment at the Universit&auml;t Karlsruhe. 
A team led by Gunnar Dolling sent a pulse of light through material whose unusual properties allow it to bend light in unexpected ways.
Dolling and colleagues also witnessed the very same backward, faster-than-light behaviour as the Rochester team.
"The propagation of [light] waves through dispersive media often leads to surprising or counterintuitive behaviour," report Dolling and colleagues, referring to dispersion as the ability of a material to separate light into different wavelengths, or colours.
These and other experiments with weird light are suddenly possible because of new light-dispersive materials, more sensitive technology to detect what light is doing, and because optics researchers are simply paying more attention to the strange things light does in odd materials.
"Up until several years ago people were not familiar with the concepts of slow and fast light," says Boyd.

Forensic jigsaw puzzle: fungi are helping scientists to estimate the time of death
Deceased individuals supposedly 'push up daisies', but a new study suggests human cadavers are more likely to support several species of white and yellow fungi.
The study is the first to describe in detail species of fungi obtained from human corpses. 
In the future, forensics experts may use the information during criminal investigations to determine when someone died.
Fungi, parasitic plants that lack chlorophyll, leaves and true roots and stems, often form part of the natural decomposition process that recycles nutrients back into the food chain.
"The fungi feed on the dead," says lead author Kiyoshi Ishii, whose team's findings are published in the May issue of the journal Legal Medicine.
Ishii, a biologist at Dokkyo University School of Medicine in Japan, and his colleagues analysed two humans whose bodies were found decomposing in very different environments.
The first was a corpse discovered lying face down on a concrete floor in an abandoned house.
Police determined the body belonged to a 72-year-old man who had been missing for 10 months.
