Although rates of maternal death in most developed countries are relatively low, in the US women have a 1 in 3500 chance of pregnancy-related death.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists say the incidence of maternal mortality has not significantly decreased in the last two decades.
But Deneux-Tharaux and team say there is persistent underidentification of maternal mortality in developed countries.
A recent study found a 19% underreporting of maternal deaths in vital statistics from France, they say.

Could tinkering with the DNA of immune cells be a cure for deadly cancers?
Two out of 17 patients with a deadly form of skin cancer have had their tumours wiped out by genetically altered immune cells, US researchers report.
But while the findings are being hailed as evidence that the troubled field of gene therapy can successfully treat cancer, other experts say the results are disappointing.
Dr Steven Rosenberg of the US National Cancer Institute (NCI) and colleagues report their findings today online ahead of print publication in the journal Science.
The technique "represents the first time that gene manipulations have been shown to cause tumour regression in humans," Rosenberg says.
The researchers infused 17 patients suffering from metastatic melanoma with their own white blood cells that had been removed and genetically engineered to fight tumours. 
The patients' T-cells had been modified with genes that code for receptors designed to recognise melanoma cells.
The cancer was eliminated in two male patients, the researchers say. 
In one case a 52-year-old man had a tumour in his armpit disappear and another on his liver shrunk enough to be surgically removed. He remained disease-free 19 months after treatment, the study says. 
Another patient, a 30-year-old man, had a lung tumour recede and showed no signs of disease 18 months later. 
"The tumours went away and both of the patients are now completely disease-free over a year and a half later," says Rosenberg who is chief of surgery at the NCI.
Before the experiment, the patients had advanced skin cancer that was not helped by standard therapies and they were expected to live just three to six months, he says. 
Disappointing response
But the cancers in the remaining 15 patients did not respond to the treatment and other gene therapy researchers say the results may be a step forward, but are no cause for celebration.
"This certainly is a significant technical advance that is going to fuel more interest ... and more enthusiasm, I hope, among researchers," says Dr Michel Sadelain, director of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center's somatic cell engineering laboratory. 
But, he adds, it is "undeniable the response here is rather disappointing".
Professor Savio Woo of Mount Sinai School of Medicine and a past president of the American Society of Gene Therapy says the researchers "need to do it in more patients and get better response rates, and when that happens we can all pop the champagne".
Scientists have touted gene therapy as holding great promise for a range of ailments, but safety problems have set the field back. 
One experiment cured two French "bubble boys" with a rare immune disorder, but later gave them leukaemia, and an 18-year-old died in a 1999 gene therapy experiment. 
Rosenberg says there are no side effects from the melanoma gene therapy. 
It was administered with the drug interleukin-2, which can cause fluid retention, he says.
The researchers hope the same approach can fight breast, lung and other cancers and are seeking regulatory approval to test the technology in other patients.

The new spaceships are meant to replace the space shuttle fleet to be retired in 2010
Europe's first probe to the Moon crashed into the lunar surface at the weekend giving stargazers around the world an astronomical fireworks display.
Scientists hope that dust kicked up by the impact of the European Space Agency (ESA) probe will tell them more about the Moon's origin.
The SMART-1 probe smashed into a plain called the Lake of Excellence on the southwestern side of the Moon's face, "producing a more intense flash than expected", says the mission's chief scientist Professor Bernard Foing.
The craft plunged to the surface at a speed of 2 kilometres per second, throwing up a cloud of dust.
ESA estimates that the impact would leave a crater measuring 3-10 metres in diameter and 1 metre deep.
Over the past three years, operating with a full-time staff of just seven and a total budget equivalent to US$151 million dollars, the little probe has been testing new technology that one day could help put humans on Mars. 
Scientists also say that the 20,000 detailed photos transmitted by the craft will yield a fresh look at the Moon, revealing Earth's satellite as a place of surprising complexity and promise rather than a lifeless rock with little to offer except grey dust. 
"SMART-1 is the vanguard" of future space missions, says the craft's operations manager, Octavio Camino-Ramos.
"Almost everything on board was innovative. It was a mission to test technology; the science was an extra plus." 
Ion thruster
An ion thruster engine has propelled the cube, which measured just 1 metre across and weighed 350 kilograms, since it was launched in September 2003. 
The engine type has only been used once before, with the US craft Deep Space 1, launched in 1998 to rendezvous with an asteroid and then a comet. 
Ion engines are fuelled by xenon gas. The gas atoms are charged by electric guns powered by solar panels and are then expelled from the rear of the spacecraft, delivering a tiny thrust, visible as a ghostly blue glow. 
Chemical engines burn out after a couple of minutes, whereas an ion engine can push on gently for months or even years, for so long as the Sun shines and the small supply of propellant lasts. 
SMART-1 travelled 100 million kilometres but used just 80 kilograms (50 litres) of fuel, an extraordinary feat in space exploration standards.
But unlike the Deep Space mission's essentially straight-line trajectories, SMART-1 had to carry out a complex series of manoeuvres to slowly but relentlessly build up speed. 
It had to loop again and again around the Earth to gain extra speed yet also juggle with the Moon's gravitational tug, all the time using a tiny engine that delivered the same power as someone picking up an A4 sheet of paper. 
Camino says the experience was "an adventure," and compared it to navigating a small sailboat buffeted by swirling winds and currents.
But the tiny thruster needed 14 months for a trip that took Apollo only three days.
"We have shown that ion propulsion works," Camino says, predicting that this will be the thruster of choice for two ESA missions in the next decade: BepiColombo, to explore Mercury, and Solar Orbiter, which will swoop close to the Sun.
And it is also likely to be the propulsion for hauling big cargo containers to the Moon to help build the first lunar settlement, or to Mars, to support the first manned mission there, he says.
Small package
Other SMART-1 innovations are a new communications system, new-generation solar panels and a package of sensors and scanners that Foing hails as "a miracle of miniaturisation - seven instruments weighing just 19 kilos".
Weighing as little as a 10th of conventional instruments carried aboard space probes, SMART's x-ray telescope and infrared spectrometer have been carrying out the most detailed map of the Moon's elements and minerals, says Foing.
SMART-1 has also sought out locations at the lunar poles that are in permanent shade and could be worth exploring if, as some scientists hope, water exists on the Moon or just below its surface.

Your genes only account for 19% of your personality. So don't blame your parents
Genes shape our health and appearance more than they shape our personality, suggests a new study of thousands of people in a genetically isolated part of the world.
According to the study, published in the August issue of PLoS Genetics, genetics account for roughly 51% of a person's height, weight and body shape, 25% of cardiovascular function and about 40% of certain blood characteristics, such as sugar and cholesterol levels.
But genes only account for about 19% of many documented personality traits, such as neuroticism, extraversion, agreeableness and conscientiousness.
"My personal view is that we have evolved to have very diverse personalities and that, compared to other traits, personality may be much less deterministic than other human characteristics," says Associate Professor Gon&ccedil;alo Abecasis, one of the study's authors.
"My view is that both genes and environment will play smaller roles than random factors."
Abecasis, a scientist at the Center for Statistical Genetics at the University of Michigan, and his colleagues examined 6148 people from the Mediterranean island of Sardinia, where many residents are related.
Roughly 95% of people in the study had Sardinian grandparents, and the test group included 5000 pairs of siblings.
The researchers believe their study is the largest ever published for the traits they examined.
The scientists took blood samples, gave physical exams, and asked participants to fill out standard personality questionnaires.
They also measured liver and thyroid function, electrolyte levels, cholesterol, blood glucose and more.
Shared DNA
To figure out the degree to which each trait was affected by genetics, the researchers first calculated the amount of DNA shared by each pair of relatives. 
For example, the DNA of identical twins is almost 100% identical, siblings average 50% similarity, and uncle-nephew pairs usually have about 25% similarity. Cousins share, on average, about 12.5% of their DNA.
The researchers then compared this information with the health, weight, personality and other data.
Computer models matched these traits with relatedness to find how much of each trait appeared to be affected by genetics.
While the study found genetic effects often determine whether a person will be heavy or thin, the researchers say we cannot always blame our genes for weight problems.
Dr David Schlessinger, who also worked on the study and is a senior scientist at the National Institute on Aging, says that "lifestyle has led to the current epidemic of obesity".
"It does appear, however, that some individuals have a genetic constitution that is more resistant to the modern diet and lifestyle than others," Schlessinger adds.
Personality and disease
Cross-examination of all of the data revealed that personality traits do not appear to be linked to blood and heart health. For example, anger-prone people don't appear to suffer more heart problems than mellow people do.
"What is unusual [about the study] ... is its size and integration of a large amount of trait information into the analysis," says Dr Wayne Frankel, senior staff scientist at The Jackson Laboratory in Maine.
"It is important that the heritability of related traits be considered together, in order to improve the power of gene-identification experiments in future."
Abecasis and his colleagues next hope to identify the particular genes that are responsible for each of the traits they studied.

Brain chemicals that make you restless and fidgety may also play a role in keeping you lean, a researcher believes
Thin people's brains may be more sensitive to a naturally occurring chemical that makes them wriggle, jiggle and fidget through the day, an international obesity conference will hear.
US researcher Associate Professor Catherine Kotz from the Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical Center and the University of Minnesota will present her research on the neuropeptide, orexin-A, at an international obesity conference in Sydney this week.
Previous research has shown that orexin-A, which was only discovered in the last decade, makes us burn energy by stimulating unconscious activity like fidgeting and restlessness.
Kotz says her study, published online in the American Journal of Physiology, shows orexin-A affects activity in rats when injected into their brains.
"We injected orexin-A into normal rats and it caused increased movement," she says.
"When we inject it into lean rats they're very sensitive to it; they really increase their movement. The obese rats don't seem to respond.
"So that said to us there is some difference in the orexin-A signalling in their brains."
Underpants study
Kotz's research grew out of an earlier study by Dr James Levine of the Mayo Clinic.
In his study Levine put lean and fat people into underwear with built-in sensors that gauged their movement through the day.
That research, published in the journal Science last year, found that lean people spend an average two hours more a day than their obese counterparts doing unconscious, spontaneous movements such as lifting their arms, jigging a foot or getting up and down.
"What he found ... is that lean individuals move for two hours more per day than obese individuals," she says.
"This is activity that was not going to the gym, not exercising." 
The fidgeters burnt about 350 kilocalories a day through this non-specific movement, the equivalent of a 45 minute brisk walk.
 Orexin-A on the brain
When Kotz's team did brain scans on their orexin-A enhanced rats, they found that the lean rats had about double the number of orexin-A receptors than the obese rats, suggesting it's sensitivity, rather than quantity, that counts.
The difference in receptor number could be because of genetic programming or changes produced by over or under stimulation during life, she says.
This question is the subject of further study.
Kotz says while the rat study hasn't been done in humans, our brains also produce orexin-A.
She says her findings could eventually lead to an anti-obesity treatment, such as a patch, that either increased the number of brain's orexin-A receptors or boost the sensitivity of existing ones.

A wide variety of food helps brushtail possums eat and eat, without overloading their bodies with toxins
Brushtail possums can tell when they've eaten too much of their favourite snacks, according to new research revealing their uncanny ability to regulate what goes into their mouths.
Unlike humans, who can pig out on chocolate or hot chips until we make ourselves sick, possums know exactly when they're starting to overload their system with toxins, says researcher Dr Karen Marsh of the Australian National University.
"They're really good at regulating their intake and knowing exactly how much they can eat," she says of the marsupial herbivores.
Marsh reports in a recent issue of the journal Ecology that the common brushtail possum (Trichosurus vulpecula) thrives when it eats a wide variety of foods, rather than a limited range.
The reasons for this have been unclear in the past.
But Marsh says her study supports one of the leading theories, which suggests that possums are better able to neutralise small amounts of naturally occurring toxins from a variety of foods than a high-toxin load from a single food.
Food toxins
Because of its plant-based diet, the brushtail possum eats foods that not only contain nutrients, but potentially toxic by-products.
It neutralises these in various ways, for example, by oxidising the toxins or converting them into different molecules. 
If the possum only eats one food it will reach the threshold for that particular toxin faster than if it selects from a wider smorgasbord.
"Basically they seem to be able to recognise whether toxins are similar or different and feed accordingly," Marsh says.
"What we think happens is that the toxins activate the emetic pathways in the body so the possums start to feel sick when their detox pathways get saturated."
Getting rid of toxins
Marsh tested the hypothesis by identifying various toxin thresholds in the possums and working out how each was eliminated by analysing metabolites in their urine. 
She then offered the possums a range of foods with similar toxin pathways and a range of foods with different pathways.
She found the possums ate less when the foods activated similar pathways.
Marsh says it's important to understand the mechanisms that regulate diet in possums because it can help in their conservation.
"We want to know what sort of habitat is going to be suitable for them," she says.
"Can they survive in a habitat that's been degraded and only has one type of plant, or do they really need that mix ... so they can be swapping between the different plants?"
She says humans should have the same responses to food toxins, but most toxic metabolites have been eliminated from our food, making us more prone to overeating.

Kandinsky's Improvisation 31 (Sea Battle), 1913 . Looks good, but how does it sound?
The expressionist painter Wassily Kandinsky wanted people to not only see his paintings but to hear them, says a neuroscientist and expert in the condition known as synaesthesia.
Dr Jamie Ward, a British neuroscientist at University College London (UCL), says the Russian-born French artist knew about synaesthesia, a sensory phenomenon in which one sense can trigger another. 
For example, synaesthetes report being able to taste music, see sounds or hear images.
"What Kandinsky wanted to do was for it to appeal to hearing as well," Ward said during a symposium at the British Association for the Advancement of Science Festival of Science. 
"Kandinsky wanted to make visual art more like music, more abstract. He also hoped that his paintings would be heard by his audiences."
For example, one synaesthete described a Kandinsky painting as having "a huge splurge of sound ... booming and vulgar", "a mousy little meee sound that translates into 'ohs' and 'ahs'" and shapes that "pop up laughing with a 'whooo'".
Ward says it's unknown whether Kandinsky experienced synaesthesia himself.
But the artist certainly knew about the phenomenon, he says.
Linking vision and sound
Synaesthetes make up only about one or two in every hundred people, but Ward believes we all link vision and sound unconsciously and we tend to agree on which images match which sounds.
However, only a tiny minority of us is aware of the crossover in our senses. 
He hypothesised that most people would be able to link an image by someone with synaesthesia to a particular piece of music upon which the image was based.
To test the theory Ward conducted a series of experiments where he asked synaesthetes to draw and describe their vision of music played by the New London Orchestra. 
"We played them musical notes and got them to draw and describe what they see," Ward says. 
A control group without synaesthesia did the same and a professional artist created animations of the images related to the music.
When more than 200 people were shown 100 images and asked to choose the animations that best suited the music they consistently selected the images from the synaesthetes. 
"It's almost as if everybody can appreciate these synaesthetic images even if they don't have synaesthesia," he says.
"Although information from the world enters our heads via different sensory organs ... once they are in the brain they are intimately connected ... in non-random ways."
Synaesthesia, which runs in families, is present from birth but not much is known about what actually causes it.
Ward says studying synaesthesia will help scientists understand how senses and thoughts are linked in out brains. 
He says the next stage of his research will use brain scans to monitor what happens when synaethetes are shown a Kandinsky painting.

A woman places flowers at the entrance to Australia Zoo after its conservationist patron Steve Irwin, or the Crocodile Hunter, died from a stingray's barb to the heart on Monday
In death as in life, iconic TV naturalist Steve Irwin captivated millions worldwide and clogged the internet as fans from around the world reacted with disbelief to news the Crocodile Hunter was dead.
Some websites groaned to a halt within hours of the first reports on Monday that Irwin had been killed by a stingray's barb through his chest in a freak diving accident off Australia's northeast coast.
Web measurement company Hitwise says Irwin's death was the biggest news event read by Australians on the internet since two Australian miners were trapped by a mine collapse in southern Tasmania state in late April. 
"We noticed that the website www.crocodilehunter.com increased in popularity quite substantially. It became the number one entertainment personality website in Australia yesterday and in the US it also became the third most popular," says a spokesperson for Hitwise Asia-Pacific.
Australian news websites struggled to keep up with demand. 
The ABC's site had to temporarily shut down, posting a notice on Monday that it was experiencing higher than normal traffic. 
It resumed soon after in a low-bandwidth format to cope with hundreds of thousands of hits. 
Newspaper websites also wobbled but kept up with demand. 
A spokesperson for the Sydney Morning Herald says its website experienced a 40% spike in page impressions compared with the previous week's average weekday number of about 500,000. 
There was also a 70% jump in visitors to its pages, the spokesperson says. 
That pattern was mirrored around the world, with Irwin's death leading major news websites such as CNN and US and UK newspaper websites, as well as swamping their 'most viewed' and 'most emailed' categories.
Blogs and internet feedback pages were also awash with postings from shocked readers from around the world, many of them from Americans charmed by Irwin's quirky style and his catchphrase "crikey".

A snapshot within a proton showing a strange quark (red) and its antistrange partner (yellow) together with two up quarks (blue) and a down quark (green)
Scientists say they've solved a decade-old puzzle about the enigmatic 'strange quark', one of the fundamental building blocks of matter.
Their findings, published recently in the journal Physical Review Letters, help put our understanding of the universe on a more solid footing.
Associate Professor Derek Leinweber from the University of Adelaide and colleagues used a combination of supercomputing and physics to study the oddly named particle.
Strange quarks are one of six different 'flavours' of quark that combine to form protons and neutrons, two of the main components of atoms.
The others are known as 'up', 'down', 'charm', 'top' and 'bottom' quarks.
The short-lived strange quark is the most mysterious of them all, Leinweber says.
It "boils up" inside the positively charged proton and then "simmers back out of existence", he says. 
Scientists have long pondered exactly how the strange quark contributes to the distribution of charge in the proton, Leinweber says.
"People have been playing around with these problems for 10 years or more."
By combining results from real-life experiments with simulations, the Adelaide team, with collaborators at the University of Edinburgh and the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility in the US, says it has calculated the strange contribution with unprecedented accuracy.
Those calculations predict that the short-lived strange quarks display an unanticipated level of symmetry in their journey.
"It's a bit of a surprise," Leinweber says. "There was some idea that the strange quark would be distributed asymmetrically."
Effective Field Theory
The research brought together expertise in supercomputing with techniques in a branch of physics called Effective Field Theory, Leinweber says.
"These are two separate areas which have been used together in a way that no-one else has thought of."
For the physics world, the findings could have major implications, particularly as experimental results coming from labs around the world are already beginning to confirm the theories of the Australian researchers.
Now, scientists are considering how to incorporate the results into research at enormous particle accelerator facilities like the Large Hadron Collider buried underground at CERN in Switzerland.
"Our result presents a huge challenge to experimental physicists in planning the next generation of experiments," says Leinweber. "Billions of dollars are going to be spent based on this result."
Ultimately, the research is helping scientists understand the universe in greater detail than ever before, Leinweber says. "It's putting our current understanding of our world on a solid foundation."

An inner ear as you have never seen it before University of Sydney's Key Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, will report its findings in the journal Acta Oto-Laryngologica.
The scientists revealed the detailed structure of the inner ear, from a guinea pig, using a new method called x-ray microtomography.
"It's CT [computed tomography] scanning for microscopy, basically a CT scanner for a microscope," says Jones.
Like hospital CT scanning, the method images internal structures in 3D using x-rays.
Structures, like bones, absorb more x-rays and are more visible than those that absorb less.
The 3D image is built up by taking a series of 'slices' of the solid object.
But x-ray microtomography can take many more slices that a hospital CT scanner.
This provides much higher resolution, allowing scientists to image the delicately thin structures of the inner ear.
The image the scientists generated shows the stapes (red) the saccular macula (yellow) and the utricular macula (blue).
It also shows the coils of the cochlea and the fluid-filled semicircular canals that help an animal keep balance.
"This structure is actually embedded in the most dense bone in the body, the temporal bone, and normal hospital medical CT doesn't have enough resolution to see these," says Jones.
Secrets of an ancient eyeball
One of the first studies Jones was involved in that used the new technique was the imaging of 410 million-year-old fossilised fish eyeballs.
The project, carried out with palaeontologist Dr Carole Burrow from the University of Queensland, was the first use of x-ray microtomography to investigate small vertebrate fossils.

Methane bubbles trapped in lake ice in October
Fears that retreating permafrost is accelerating climate change have been strengthened by a new study that says emissions of the greenhouse gas methane are soaring in northern Siberia.
In a complex cycle, permafrost melts at the edges of lakes that previously were iced over year-round, according to the research led by Dr Katey Walter of the University of Alaska at Fairbanks.
Organic material, the remains of rotted plants and long-dead animals, then subsides into the lake from the soil, slides to the lake bottom and decomposes to form methane.
Eventually, during a thaw, this methane bubbles to the surface and is released into the atmosphere. 
In the first major study into the bubbling phenomenon, or ebullition, Walter's team believes that current estimates of methane released from wetlands between latitudes 65 and 70&deg; north should be upgraded by 10-63%.
"Ebullition from Siberian thaw lakes is a large and increasing source of atmospheric [methane] as Siberian thaw lakes continue to expand," warns the study, published today in the journal Nature.
Between 1974 and 2000, a period that matches figures for local warming, the spread of thaw lakes caused methane emissions in Siberia to rise by 58%, it says.
The greenhouse gas methane comes from natural sources such as agriculture, decomposing vegetation and marshland. 
One worry is what scientists called a "positive feedback" from billions of tonnes of stored methane that is locked in the ground and under frozen lakes in  Canada and Siberia. 
This scenario, in essence, is a vicious circle, scientists say: global warming warms up the permafrost, which releases the trapped methane and this in turn adds to the greenhouse effect. 
Volume for volume, methane is 21 times more effective at trapping solar heat respectively than carbon dioxide.
By itself, methane accounts for a fifth of the man-made greenhouse effect of the past 200 years, scientists say.

Playing against other gamers may help to build informal connections and expose people to multiple world views
Gaming can be a sociable experience, according to a new study that questions the myth of the lone gamer sitting at the computer, disconnected from society.
The US study says games involving multiple players can act like informal gathering places like pubs and coffee shops, so can boost the players' social connections. 
Assistant Professor Constance Steinkuehler of the University of Wisconsin-Madison and Assistant Professor Dmitri Williams of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign looked at people playing so-called massively multiplayer online games (MMOs).
"By providing spaces for social interaction and relationships beyond the workplace and home, MMOs have the capacity to function as one form of a new 'third space' for informal sociability," the researchers write. 
While such sociability won't offer "deep emotional support", they add, it has the benefit of exposing players to a wide range of viewpoints and a more diverse social environment. 
The effects of the internet on society are still being debated, the researchers note in an article in the Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication.
Some say it allows people to build connections and communities, while others say such virtual links are just a poor substitute for the real thing. 
The researchers sought to investigate the role of MMOs, in which players inhabit 'avatars' or on-screen representations of characters within virtual worlds and chat with other players by text or voice, in players' social lives. 
They studied whether one game, Asheron's Call I and II, built players' "social capital" by dividing 750 people into game-playing and non-playing groups. 
They also conducted a two-year study of the activities and perceptions of a group of people playing the game Lineage. 
Steinkuehler and Williams conclude that the games helped players gather a type of social capital known as bridging, which involves making informal connections with others, while they didn't generally help people build stronger social bonds.
Such weaker social links are important, the researchers say, because they offer players the opportunity to be exposed to diverse world views that they may not encounter in the real world. 
But players who did become more deeply involved in the games did run the risk of having virtual relationships replace real-life ones, the researchers note. However, to see these online communities as an entirely bad thing is short-sighted, they say.
"To argue that MMO game play is isolated and passive media consumption in place of informal social engagement is to ignore the nature of what participants actually do behind the computer screen," they state. 
"In the case of MMOs, game play is more akin to playing five-person poker in a neighbourhood tavern that is accessible from your own living room."

Chimp or lollipop man? Dominant chimps look both ways to see if the road's clear before shepherding other chimps across
Adult male chimpanzees act like school lollipop men by leading smaller chimps across roads that dissect their forest habitats, according to a new study.
The finding demonstrates that chimps display concern for family and friends and will risk their own safety to ensure the welfare of others.
Scientists now believe such ability for care and consideration is present in certain primates, and not just humans.
"I think that we would definitely see this kind of behaviour in other great ape species, and different populations may reveal cultural differences in protective orderings," says Kimberley Hockings, lead author of the study, which is published in the journal Current Biology.
Hockings, a researcher at the University of Stirling in Scotland, and colleagues observed a group of wild chimps in Bossou, Guinea, West Africa.
The chimp group consisted of three adult males, five adult females, three juveniles and one infant.
Two roads dissect the chimps' forest homeland. The first is a narrow road used by pedestrians, while the second is wider and carries trucks, motorbikes, cars, as well as pedestrians.
The scientists analysed 19 instances where the chimpanzees crossed the two roads.
In each instance, an adult male, often the alpha male named Yolo, would stand at the edge of the road. He then would carefully look left and right, then motion with an arm.
At that point, the other chimps formed themselves into an ordered line and followed behind. The order nearly always consisted of adult males first with females, juveniles and the infant second. The leader, or another adult male, would then wait at the end of the line to assist the littlest ones.
When crossing the heavier traffic road, the second ranked male, Foaf, would continue to scan for vehicles and people while the elderly third male, Tua, and the alpha female took the lead. 
The researchers noted that the female would move into the more forward, leader position when the degree of crossing risk increased.
"They tend to travel in such ordered lines in risky situations such as road crossing and crop raiding," says Hockings.
"Depending on the situation, when moving through the forest, it is much more common that the chimpanzees are spread out."
Dr Klaus Zuberb&uuml;hler is a University of St Andrews scientist who conducts research on the cognitive capacities of non-human primates. The Scotland-based scientist calls the findings "amazing".
"What's perhaps most striking is that Kimberly's research shows that these free-ranging chimpanzees are not indifferent to the welfare of other group members, in contrast to previous findings reported from captive chimpanzees," Zuberb&uuml;hler says. 
"They appear to have an understanding of other group members' vulnerability and they take action in response to this knowledge.
"It also highlights the importance of studying the cognitive capacities of primates in the wild. The majority of research on chimpanzee intelligence is currently conducted in highly deprived lab situations, and, perhaps unsurprisingly, individuals often show little or no interest in engaging in cooperative or altruistic acts."
Hockings hopes future research will determine similar progression orders in other great ape populations, which could reveal how human social organisation probably emerged in our distant primate ancestors.

The coral reef pygmy goby, Eviota sigillata, swims its way into the record books
Life on the Great Barrier Reef is fast and furious for the coral reef pygmy goby, the world's shortest-living fish whose entire existence lasts no longer than two months.
The pygmy goby's record-breaking status was confirmed this week by Guinness World Records. Not only is it the fastest living fish, it has the shortest life span of any creature with a backbone known to science.
The tiny fish spend their first three weeks as larvae in the open ocean before they settle on the reef.
They then mature within two weeks and have a maximum adult lifespan of just three and a half weeks, says Professor David Bellwood from James Cook University and ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies.
In total, they live 59 days, "and that's the maximum", Bellwood says.
"It's like taking a 90 year old woman and saying that's how long humans live. Most of them don't make it there."
Bellwood and his colleague Martial Depczynski first reported the goby's remarkable life span in the journal Current Biology last year, and then submitted it to Guiness for world record scrutiny.
They figured out the life span of the fish by examining small bones in their ears called otoliths, which grow as they age.
"Each day, pygmy gobies lay down a new ring in their otoliths, much as a tree does for each year," Bellwood says.
The results were a complete surprise.
"We were just stunned," Bellwood says. "We thought at first it must have been a mistake, but we went back again and again and confirmed it."
Pygmy gobies (Eviota sigillata) are found on the Great Barrier Reef and other reefs in the Pacific and Indian oceans.
During their three-weeks of sexual maturity, the fish produce just three clutches of eggs. To help ensure they survive, the male goby stands guard, fanning the eggs with his fins while they are incubating.
The fast and furious lifestyle of the fish is probably an evolutionary response to the fact that they have so many predators on the reef, the scientists say.
For small species living in places where their life expectancy is low, evolution often favours a 'live fast, die young' strategy.
"It's just a case of reproduce like mad before you die," says Bellwood.

Common brown snakes like this one surprised the scientists by producing higher levels of venom than anyone had seen before
Australian snakes are delivering more venom than we realise, according to researchers who say this may force us to rethink how we treat snakebites. 
The poisonous Australian brown snake is one of the surprise packages, producing what lead researcher Peter Mirtschin describes as "spectacular" yields of venom. 
Mirtschin, managing director of the company Venom Supplies and adjunct research fellow at the University of South Australia, and colleagues publish their findings online in the journal Ecotoxicology.
Dr Bryan Grieg Fry, of the Australian Venom Research Unit at the University of Melbourne, says the study is "of huge importance", particularly in relation to brown snakes and current antivenom guidelines.
"The findings have huge clinical implications. The brown snake is the most common cause of snakebite in Australia and the most common cause of death by snakebite in Australia," says Fry, who wasn't involved in the research.
"The key to antivenom is to get it in early and to get in the proper amounts. A big amount [given] early means less overall total, as well as a better clinical outcome."
"[These findings] can dramatically influence the amount of antivenom needed."
He says the findings are "definitely" strong enough to change clinical practice in Australia.
Milking snakes
The researchers milked 33 dangerous species of snakes native and non-native to Australia numerous times over a six-year period from 1999 to 2005. 
Then they averaged the yield, or the average amount of venom a snake produces when it is milked, by each snake type.
The team found that snakes from the Pseudonaja genus, including the Queensland and South Australian common brown snake, yielded higher than previously published amounts of venom.
"In certain individuals we found quite spectacular yields. If you had a bite by one of those you'd be in real trouble," says Mirtschin.
Higher percentage solids were also obtained from venoms from four cobra species from the Naja genus and the Pseudechis (king brown) genus.
Snake venom comprises salts, water, enzymes, proteins and other macromolecular and smaller organic and inorganic compounds.
Venom yield is traditionally measured and compared in its dried powder form, where the water is removed, leaving the remaining solids.
The findings have led researchers to call for a rethink on current volumes and dosages of antivenom serums. 
"If you are giving antivenom then maybe the vial size of the antivenom should be increased. Or at least the number of vials that are recommended as the initial dose [be increased]," Mirtschin says.

When the researchers asked the woman to imagine she was playing tennis, her brain scan lit up in virtually the same places as the brains of healthy volunteers asked to do the same thing
Brain scans of a woman who has been in a vegetative state for five months show her imagining playing tennis and responding to commands, researchers report.
They say their study, published today in the journal Science, shows the woman was conscious despite her coma-like state, although several experts disagree.
The researchers stress that the study is unlikely to shed light on issues such as the case of Terri Schiavo, a Florida woman who spent 15 years in a persistent vegetative state and was allowed to die in March 2005 after a long court battle.
Dr Adrian Owen, a neuroscientist at the University of Cambridge and colleagues in the UK and Belgium, used functional magnetic resonance imaging, or fMRI, to look at the woman's brain in action. 
The 23-year-old woman, who was injured in a car accident, had been unresponsive, unable to communicate, and met the clinical criteria for a vegetative state, the researchers say. 
They looked at her brain function when listening to sentences such as, "There was milk and sugar in his coffee." The brain scan lit up in very similar ways to those seen in healthy volunteers, Owen's team found.
The researchers then asked the woman to imagine certain acts. 
"One task involved imagining playing a game of tennis and the other involved imagining visiting all of the rooms of her house, starting from the front door," the researchers write.
Her scan lit up in virtually the same places as the brains of the healthy volunteers asked to do the same thing. 
"These results confirm that ... this patient retained the ability to understand spoken commands and to respond to them through her brain activity, rather than through speech or movement," the researchers write. 
She also clearly intended to cooperate, which "confirmed beyond any doubt that she was consciously aware of herself and her surroundings", they write. 
"This is unlikely the case for all vegetative patients," Owen's team cautions in its report.
Experts note the woman had relatively little brain damage, and say traumatic brain injury often heals better than injury caused by stroke or heart attack such as Schiavo suffered.
Schiavo also had been in her state for far longer than the UK woman, allowing for severe deterioration of her brain.
Dr Ross Zafonte, a brain rehabilitation expert at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, says the study shows a unique way of assessing brain function using scans.
"They raise a whole issue regarding consciousness and how we use this term," Zafonte says. 
"Is she just a rare bird? Will we see this on a more common basis?" 
Other brain experts are sceptical. 
"If this patient is actually conscious, why wouldn't she be able to engage in intentional overt motor acts, given that she had not suffered functional or structural lesion of the motor pathways?" asks Dr Lionel Naccache of France's INSERM research institute in a commentary published with the report. 
He says the patient apparently has "a rich mental life, including auditory language processing and the ability to perform mental imagery tasks". 
The study points to a need to develop better scans to assess a patient's brain status, Naccache says. 
Dr Paul Matthews, a neuroscientist at Imperial College London and University of Oxford, says the study does not demonstrate consciousness.
"Response to stimuli, even complex linguistic stimuli, does not provide evidence of a 'decision' to respond. Withdrawal from an unexpected painful pin prick does not represent a 'decision' to respond," he says.

Could hydrogen sulfide gas from the river have killed Dr Bogle and Mrs Chandler?
New evidence may support the idea that 'rotten egg gas' from a polluted river was to blame for two of the most mysterious deaths in Australian history.
Evidence aired in an ABC TV documentary this week suggests a concentrated cloud of hydrogen sulfide killed physicist Dr Gilbert Bogle and Mrs Margaret Chandler.
But some toxicologists remain sceptical that the gas was behind the deaths of the two lovers, whose bodies were found by the banks of Sydney's Lane Cover River in 1963.
At the time some suspected they were killed by a rapidly acting poison.
Yet the investigation, which included help from the FBI and New Scotland Yard, could find no cause of death, motive or killer.
Many suspected Margaret Chandler's husband Geoffrey. But the documentary Who killed Dr Bogle and Mrs Chandler? resurrects the hydrogen sulfide theory, a notion first discounted by police investigators in 1971.
According to the theory, hydrogen sulfide bubbling up from the river mud in the still early morning air had became trapped in a hollow where the lovers lay in embrace.
The gas had come mainly from industrial waste that had been dumped into the river over the past 60 years, and hydrogen sulfide from sewage in the river.
US forensic toxicologist Dr Thomas Milby told the film-maker that hydrogen sulfide gas can be fatal in high doses and his reading of the autopsy reports convinced him the gas was the culprit.
"The probabilities were [that] it was an inhaled gas, as opposed to a pill or something like that," he says.
Milby also commented on analyses of blood samples taken from the two victims during the investigations. These found a bluish tinge in both samples, which he says supports the hydrogen sulfide theory.
"I saw nothing in either report that would, in my opinion, exclude the possibility of hydrogen sulfide as being the culprit that killed them."
Sceptical
But at least two Australian experts are not so sure about the theory.
"As a healthy sceptic I'd say 'interesting theory' but why didn't they smell [the gas]? Because it's pretty disgusting," says forensic pathologist Dr Christopher Lawrence who is with the Tasmanian health department.
"Also, were the tests taken in a way that you could rely on the results?"
He says while hydrogen sulfide could discolour the blood by interacting with haemoglobin any blood tests would needed to have been carried out very shortly after the deaths.

Wreaths laid for Steve Irwin who died from a stingray's barb to the heart while filming a documentary in North Queensland
This week's mass grieving in response to the death of Australian crocodile hunter Steve Irwin is part of a fairly recent phenomenon dependent on the mass media, say experts.
But how do we make sense of this public grieving for the loss of someone most have never met?
We generally think of grief as being associated with the loss of people we're very close to, like a family member, says psychologist Grant Brecht, of the Australian Psychological Society.
But he says we can feel close to someone we have never met if we come to know and like them through their appearances in the media. 
"We conjure up in our own mind feelings and thoughts about what that person would be like," says Brecht.
And when they die we respond as if we did in fact know them.
"We can experience grief almost at the same level as we may well do with a family member," says Brecht.
"People would have felt an affinity with Steve," he says. "He was a bit of an Australian icon, a bit of an Australian larrikin, someone who seemed to have quite an affinity with animals, which most of us would respect."
Brecht says the mourning is a healthy part of dealing with the feeling of loss.
While most of us will remember the spontaneous outpourings exhibited after the death of Princess Diana, grieving hasn't always been such a public affair.
A recent phenomenon
Australian National University historian Professor Pat Jalland says mass public grieving has really only taken off since the 1970s.
"Had the equivalent of Princess Diana died 40 years earlier I can guarantee it would not have resulted in anything like what happened," she says.
Jalland says the last period in history when grieving was an accepted activity was during the 19th century, before the advent of mass media.
At this time death claimed many infant lives and grieving occurred through religious rituals.
But between 1918 and the 1970s public grieving was suppressed, says Jalland.
In part this was helped by a decline in infant mortality, which meant death mainly happened in old age and behind closed doors at home and, eventually, in hospital.
Silence about death
The suppression of grief was also helped by a decline in religious ritual and by a period of major wars in which soldiers, and by implication all of us, were expected to bear death with stoicism, says Jalland.
"The two world wars created a massive overload of death and sorrow which induced what Freud and others call death denial - a silence about death," she says.
"The emotional responses were suppressed."
At this time media coverage of sudden and tragic deaths were very factual and lacked the personal stories that are common today, says Jalland.
But she says all that changed in the 1970s when there was a huge cultural shift towards more open displays of emotion.
This shift was encouraged by the women's and gay liberation movements, says Jalland, and by psychologists like Elisabeth Kubler-Ross who encouraged open discussion about death and dying.
And it was encouraged by the mass media, which showed grief as a normal response to tragedy by reporting the personal stories of those involved.
Secular spirituality
Dr David Ritchie of Deakin University, who has a special interest in grief education, says the good side of mass media facilitated grief is that it gives people permission to grieve.
He says this is important in a society where people seldom die at home, there are few rituals around death and people's main experience of death is through the media.
"The idea of death as part of the life cycle is really foreign," says Ritchie, who is also on the management committee of the Australian Centre for Grief and Bereavement.
Ritchie says spontaneous outpourings of grief in the company of strangers helps people make sense of the shocking nature of sudden death. 
Making shrines out of flowers, photos, artwork and poetry, lighting candles and sharing stories about the person who has died all helps to make people feel connected and empowered, says Ritchie.
"It's part of a secular spirituality".
But Ritchie doesn't see mass public grieving as anything like the grief of a close family member.
"We can always see Steve Irwin by looking at the films," he says. 
"We can always press the rewind button or put the tape back in again because that's how we knew him."
It will be very different for his family, says Ritchie.
And he says each person experiences grief differently and the "one size fits all" version sanctioned by the mass media could lead to inauthentic experiences of grief.

Most people who had died from bird flu virus in the Vietnamese study had the virus in their blood, suggesting it could have been transported out of the respiratory tract
The H5N1 bird flu virus replicates far more aggressively in people than common human flu viruses, a study of patients in Vietnam has found, offering further insight as to why the virus is so deadly. 
The study, published online in the journal Nature Medicine, also found that the virus gets into the blood stream of many of the humans it kills, which means the virus can spread to other parts of the body.
Dr Menno de Jong, of the Oxford University Clinical Research Unit at Vietnam's Hospital for Tropical Diseases in Ho Chi Minh City, says that the unusually high viral loads trigger intense cytokine responses, an immune system overreaction that can be fatal.
Cytokines are proteins in the immune system that fight off intruders such as bacteria and viruses. 
"During H5N1 infection, the [cytokine] response seems to be very, very intense. Cytokines want to get rid of this intruder but if you have very high levels of cytokines, it can also damage the body ... it can be directed against your own cells and organs," says de Jong.
The study involved 18 people infected with H5N1 and eight with human flu in 2004 and 2005 in Vietnam.
Scientists found far higher viral loads in the nose and throats of those infected with bird flu than human flu. 
Thirteen of those infected with H5N1 died and the virus was found in the blood of at least nine of them, suggesting it could have been transported out of the respiratory tract. 
The virus was also found in the rectums of most of those with H5N1, suggesting it could have spread through the blood stream into the gastrointestinal tract. 
Those with common flu had no virus in their blood or rectum. No one died in that group. 
"The fatal outcome of H5N1 infections seems to be associated with high levels of replication of the virus and also the detection of the virus in the blood," says de Jong. 
The team was able to draw a connection between those who were most ill and the level of cytokines found in them. 
"We found that levels of cytokines were much higher in H5N1 patients than in the human flu cases. Again, the highest levels of cytokines were found in those who died of H5N1," he says. 
"The high levels of the virus triggered an overwhelming inflammatory response that contributed to lung dysfunction and eventual death." 
De Jong highlights the need to stop the virus replicating. 
"What's important is to stop the replication as soon as possible, so you prevent damage to the lungs and prevent the inflammatory response to the virus," he says. 
But he says that early diagnosis is a challenge, especially in remote places where health services are not readily available.

Could graffiti be a sign of something more serious than teen rebellion?
Teens who get involved in graffiti 'tagging' may be showing early symptoms of a personality disorder, an Australian psychiatrist says.
Professor Graham Martin, director of child and adolescent psychiatry at the University of Queensland and colleagues, studied more than 2600 people aged 13. 
He says the study, presented at an international child and adolescent mental health conference in Melbourne this week, found that teens who graffiti "are significantly different to those who do not graffiti".
"They satisfy the ... criteria for conduct disorder and or delinquency and later down the track a number of these young people go on to antisocial behaviour personality disorder," he says.
"These young people ... were very antisocial on a range of other factors. They weren't just mildly conduct disordered, they were scoring to the extreme range of antisocial behaviour."
Martin says the findings of the study show that conventional methods of handling young graffiti offenders, such as dealing with them under the legal system, are doomed to failure.
But he says the good news is that with intensive individual, family and community therapy it's possible to put people back on track.
"Graffiti may be one gateway into working with young people to assist them to find a new direction," he says.
"It may be extending their creative skills or just sitting down with them and saying, listen you've had a bit of a shit life haven't you?"
Subtexts of graffiti
Martin says tagging conveys a number of messages, from saying "hello, I'm here" to being a territorial marker and an expression of rage against authority.
He says the study found adolescent graffitists had done around six to eight other acts, such as setting fires, beating people up and stealing.
They also had higher rates of drug use, academic failure, physical and sexual abuse, depression, anxiety and suicidal thoughts.
Of the teenagers studied, about 12% of boys and almost 11% of girls had done some graffiti. 
It may even be possible to pick a future graffitist, Martin says, underlining the importance of early intervention.
"You can pick many of these young people somewhere around the age of three," he says.
"The average kindergarten teacher will tell you, I don't like that child, I can't work with them, they spit at me, they spit at the other kids, they hit people, they won't learn.
"You can certainly predict which ones will go on to antisocial behaviour, and within that graffiti is going to be one of the things that stands out."

One critic is concerned that the new packaging will make sugary soft drinks more appealing to children
Can't decide which soft drink to buy? Help may be at hand with a new drinks bottle that has flavour buttons to give you multiple choices in one container.
The programmable bottle, designed by a US company, could also improve choices for shampoos, sauces, paints and perfumes, while reducing manufacturing costs and taking up less shelf space, its developers say.
"The idea here is that the company can launch more variety, but distribute less product around the country," says Tom Woolf, president and founder of Ipifini, based in Sudbury, Massachusetts.
The concept came from software that Woolf invented, called Innovation Engine, which pulls knowledge from databases to systematically help the user improve an existing product or come up with a new idea.
When it comes to improving soft drinks, food manufacturers appeal to broad tastes. For instance, brand colas come in several flavours.
Building and operating several factory lines to accommodate each flavour is more expensive than using just one.
Distributing the variety of flavours is also a challenge. Each store needs more of one flavour than another, which can make ordering and stocking an inventory nightmare.
And although large stores may be able to accommodate all flavours, small stores usually have limited shelf space.
But the programmable bottle would require just one factory line to dispense the base flavour, such as cola. Several different flavours would be locked in sealed, plastic buttons around the edge of the bottle neck.
A customer could choose cherry cola, for example, by pressing the cherry button, squirting the flavour into the drink. To get cherry vanilla, both cherry and vanilla flavour buttons could be pressed.
Other products, such as paint, perfume, and shampoos could also offer customised colours, scents or conditioning formulas.
Drink or toy?
But the bottle may have some unintentional consequences for children.
"It's clear to me that it will be seen as a toy," says Diane Levin, professor of education at Wheelock College in Boston, and an expert in how popular culture affects child development.
"Any child looking at that bottle will want to play with the buttons," she says, pointing out that if the bottle is used for sugary soft drinks, it has the potential for luring kids into seeing junk food as something to play with.
But Woolf disagrees. "I don't think it's going to change how many people drink sugared drinks or non-sugared drinks," he says.
According to Woolf, the first use of the bottle will be for flavoured, sugarless water.
Ipifini has licenced the technology to a company that sells flavours worldwide.

Sudoku tests your brain's neural circuits, especially ones involved in memory
No wonder Sudoku puzzles give your brain a good work-out. Scientists say solving them depends on neural pathways that even the most powerful computers can't replicate.
They say that by studying how people solve the puzzles, we might be able to develop more intelligent and brain-like computers.
In a paper published on the arXiv physics website, Professor John Hopfield of Princeton University explores the unique brain processes we use when playing Sudoku.
This mathematical puzzle involves filling in a grid of 81 squares with varying combinations of the numbers one to nine, something that sounds simple but can be diabolically hard.
To crack Sudoku our brains use a unique set of neural pathways known as associative memory, Hopfield says, which enables us to discover a pattern from a partial clue.
Although computers can store large amounts of information and process it at great speed, they aren't yet capable of sophisticated associative memory.
Hopfield provides an algorithm of associative memory in his paper, which he says could be implemented in silicon chips.
Patterns
We all recognise the basic pattern of counting from one to nine, yet the task of completing a Sudoku puzzle is confounded because of the large number of possible permutations of this pattern.
But every time we put the right number in the right place it provides us with a clue, which reduces the number of permutations.
In this way Sudoku is based on a combination of logic and intelligent guesswork based on our abilities of associative memory, Hopfield says.
"In neural terms, the signals developed  ... can produce a strong and reasonably accurate feeling of correctness of the item retrieved," Hopfield says.
"This fact may account for our strong psychological feeling of 'right' or 'wrong' when we retrieve a memory from a minimal clue."
Brains versus computers
Associate Professor Andrew Paplinski is an Australian computer scientist who specialises in neural networks at Monash University in Melbourne.
He says the process described in Hopfield's paper helps us to remember a name from a fragment or recognise a partially obscured face.
He says applying Hopfield's model could lead to more accurate facial recognition computer technology.
Being able to mimic associative memory would give computers "extreme robustness of pattern recognition", Paplinski says.
For example, for a computer to recognise a partially visible face it would first have to recognise that the face is obscured, then that it is a face, and then it would have to find a match.
"To answer all these questions takes an enormous amount of computation," he says.
He says we can do this in a fraction of a second in a slow computer like our brain. So there were would be significant implications if we can figure out how this is done and design computers that can replicate it.

Not breathing while training with weights can increase the pressure on your eyes, potentially leading to glaucoma
Holding your breath while you're weight lifting can increase the risk of developing eye disease and potentially blindness, a study says.
Weight lifters who don't breathe while they're training can experience temporary increases in eye pressure that could heighten the risk of developing glaucoma, according to a study published in the Archives of Ophthalmology this week.
Researchers at the Catholic University of Brasilia in Brazil measured the intraocular pressure of 30 men aged 18 to 40 during a bench press session.
"We tested subjects performing a bench press, a popular exercise in [gyms]," the researchers say.
A bench press is done by lying on your back on a bench and raising a bar bell above your chest.
The researchers measured eye pressure while the subjects were holding their breath and compared this to when they were exhaling.
The study found that eye pressure increased more if they were holding their breath than if they were breathing. 
According to the findings, 90% of subjects had an increase in eye pressure when they didn't exhale while doing the bench presses, compared with 62% who did.
"The mean intraocular pressure increased significantly during weight lifting," the researchers conclude.
"Prolonged weightlifting could be a potential risk factor for the development or progression of glaucoma."
Musicians also at risk
Glaucoma is a condition associated with pressure on the eye. The pressure slowly destroys the optic nerve at the back of the eye, causing vision impairment and possible blindness.
The researchers say the form of glaucoma relevant to weight lifters is known as normal-tension, or low-tension glaucoma.
This is most common in people who experience frequent changes in eye pressure.
The disease can be hard to pick up because it develops even though eye pressure is normal when it's measured in routine checks.
It's also more common among people who play high-resistance wind instruments or those with asthma or intestinal or urinary tract blockages.
"Intermittent intraocular pressure increases during weightlifting should be suspected in patients with normal tension glaucoma who perform such exercises," the authors conclude.

Computer-generated image of TrES-2 as seen from the night side, with its host star in the distance
Astronomers using a tiny amateur-class telescope and off-the-shelf camera lenses have found a Jupiter-sized planet orbiting a star 500 light-years from Earth.
The planet, called TrES-2, is the first to be found in this particular field of view, known as the Kepler Field.
The discovery is the second for a network called the Trans-Atlantic Exoplanet Survey, or TrES, which taps small telescopes in California, Arizona and the Canary Islands to hunt for planets outside our solar system.
The team looks for planets that pass in front of their parent stars, relative to the view from Earth.
As the planets transit, they slightly dim the total amount of visible light that radiates from the star, as seen from Earth.
By observing the star over a period of weeks or months, astronomers can detect if there are any objects that temporarily and regularly block a bit of sunlight.
"It's really difficult to make these measurements," says Francis O'Donovan, a graduate student at the California Institute of Technology and the lead author of a paper slated to appear in the Astrophysical Journal.
TrES-2 is a gas giant, similar to Jupiter but somewhat bigger and more massive.
But unlike Jupiter, TrES-2 is very close to its parent star and very hot. The planet dims its parent star's light by only 1.5% as it passes around every 2.5 days.
The astronomers also had to rule out other possible explanations for the dimming, such as a partner star gravitationally locked in orbit with the target star, called GSC 03549-02811 and located in the constellation Draco.
Finally after months of work, the observation was confirmed by a large 10 metre telescope at the Keck Observatory in Hawaii.
"All our hard work was made worthwhile when we saw the results," O'Donovan says, who hopes to parlay his discovery into a doctorate degree in astronomy.
O'Donovan's goal is to find Earth-sized planets beyond our solar system, but for that he will need much more powerful telescopes. He may return to the TrES discovery in the future.
The planet is the first found in the Kepler Field, a part of the sky that will be the sole target of a NASA telescope slated for launch in 2008.
The Kepler Space Telescope is designed to find Earth-like planets in orbits that favour the development of life.
The TrES network involves the Sleuth telescope at Caltech's Palomar Observatory in San Diego County, the Planet Search Survey Telescope at Lowell Observatory near Flagstaff, Arizona, and the Stellar Astrophysics and Research on Exoplanets (STARE) telescope in the Canary Islands.
A new larger telescope, funded by the Discovery Channel, is under development at Lowell that will also be used for hunting extrasolar planets.

Scientists have found what's thought to be the first link between storms on Earth and turbulence in space
Thunderstorms on Earth can lead to storms in the outer reaches of the atmosphere that disrupt radio transmissions and other electronic communications, US researchers say.
The research, which is published in a recent issue of the journal Geophysical Research Letters, is believed to be the first time researchers have found a global link between weather on Earth and in space.
The discovery could lead to more reliable global-positioning satellite (GPS) navigation and short-wave radio transmissions by improving forecasts of high-altitude disturbances that can disrupt them, says University of California, Berkeley researcher Dr Thomas Immel. 
Using data from NASA satellites, Immel and other researchers discovered that thunderstorms over South America, Africa and Southeast Asia can create turbulence above the equator in part of the upper atmosphere known as the ionosphere.
The ionosphere is formed from solar x-rays and ultraviolet light, which break apart atoms and molecules in the upper atomosphere, creating a layer of electrically charged gas known as plasma.
The densest part of the ionosphere forms two bands of plasma close to the equator at a hight of about 400 kilometres.
These plasma bands are far too thin to be directly affected by wind from thunderstorms. But the researchers found that the wind can shape the plasma bands by generating electricity in the layer of atmosphere below them. 
Three of the densest sections of plasma were located directly above areas with frequent thunderstorms: the Amazon Basin in South America, the Congo Basin in Africa, and Indonesia.
But the researchers found another dense section of plasma above the Pacific Ocean, far from thunderstorm zones.
They say this is evidence that tropical thunderstorms have a global influence. 
That may explain why the ionosphere above North America is more turbulent than other areas, disrupting radio transmissions that travel through it. 
"We now know that accurate predictions of ionospheric disturbances have to incorporate this effect from tropical weather," Immel says. 
Researchers now hope to determine if the plasma bands shift with the seasons, or during large events like hurricanes.

The return of a fragment of the Parthenon to Greece shouldn't set a precedent for the repatriation of other museum pieces, says the University of Heidelberg
The battle over fragments taken from Greece's Parthenon has resurfaced with the return of a small piece of the ancient monument by a German university.
The fragment consists of a foot, carved from marble, which was taken nearly 200 years ago from the northern frieze.
Greek officials hailed the fragment's recent return as an important step toward the return of other fragments of the 5th century BC building, many of which are kept at the British Museum in London.
The relief sculpture, which measures about 7 by 12 centimetres, had been held at the University of Heidelberg for more than 130 years and first appeared in the university's inventory in 1871.
It was probably taken as a souvenir by a German visitor to Greece. 
"This is a historic day. For the first time in almost 200 years, a precious piece of the Parthenon abroad is put in its original place," Greek culture minister Giorgos Voulgarakis said as the sculpture was handed over by the university's vice-rector Professor Angelos Chaniotis.
The University of Heidelberg says the decision to return the fragment was "guided by the scholarly aim of promoting the unification of the Parthenon as a unique monument of world culture".
Voulgarakis hails the repatriation of the small fragment not only as a highly symbolic act, but as an unprecedented move in favour of the reunification of Greece's artistic heritage.
"For the first time, the silent agreement among museums in possession of Parthenon sculptures has been broken," he says.
Archaeological artefacts scattered
The fearless horsemen, sprightly youths, lounging deities, belligerent centaurs and expressive horses carved by Phidias in the 5th century BC are scattered throughout several European museums, including the Louvre in Paris. But the bulk of the marbles are kept in London's British Museum.
Greece contends that the 17 figures and 56 panels on display there were stolen in 1801 by Lord Elgin, British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire. The works have since become known as the Elgin marbles.
Britain says that Lord Elgin had permission from the ruling Turkish authorities to take them.
The British also contend that the marbles have received better treatment at the British Museum, where they are safe from the polluted Athens air, which has damaged other Greek treasures.
Voulgarakis remarks that a space in the new Acropolis museum, which is due to be completed next year, has been reserved for the Parthenon sculptures.
"The demand for unification of the Parthenon sculptures originates exclusively by moral reasons and not by a nationalistic obsession," he says.
A precedent?
The University of Heidelberg stresses that the transfer of the fragment is "a special case that should not be used as a precedent for other monuments and works of art".
But the German gesture is likely to cause controversy among museums worldwide.
In 2002, when negotiations were under way to return a Parthenon fragment held at the Salinas Regional Archaeological Museum in Palermo, Sicily, directors of several major museums around the world deplored the move, saying that it could destabilise the entire museum system.

Pluto, or 134340, is in the centre and its satellite Charon, 134340 1, is just below it. The newly discovered satellites, now called 134340 II and 134340 III, are to the right
Pluto has been stripped of its membership of the cosmic A-list and given a humble new tag: 134340.
The enigmatic, icy world spotted in 1930 is know officially known as 134340 Pluto.
It has been lumped among 136,562 asteroids and other small bodies by the Minor Planet Center, part of the International Astronomical Union (IAU). 
Pluto's satellites, Charon, Nix and Hydra, have been numbered 134340 I, 134340 II and 134340 III respectively under the latest minor planet list.
The IAU last month declared Pluto to be a 'dwarf planet' that should not belong among the hallowed ranks of Mercury, Earth, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.
The organisation is now drawing up a catalogue of dwarf planets whose initial members will include Pluto, the large asteroid Ceres and a distant object, 2003 UB313, unofficially named Xena.
Until the IAU meeting, 2003 UB313 had laid claim to being the solar system's 10th planet.
Rebel astronomers are circulating a petition, contesting the dwarf planet definition as unscientific and the decision on Pluto as undemocratic.
They intend to hold a conference next year that, in their view, will overhaul the definition of a planet. 
Pluto's status had long been contested by astronomers who say its tiny size, odd orbit and orbital plane preclude it from joining the other acknowledged planets.
By the new IAU yardstick, a planet has "cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit". In other words, it is massive enough to wield a gravity that clears rocks and other debris on its orbital path.

The report likens the rock art to the Palaeolithic art of Western Europe
The largest collection of ancient rock art in the world, located in the rugged northwest of Australia, should be entirely protected from industry, says a new report.
The report on the archaeology and rock art in the Dampier Archipelago was released this week by the National Trust of Australia (WA).
It fuels ongoing debate about development in the area, which is being considered for National Heritage listing.
Robin Chapple, of the National Trust, says there are around a million rock carvings on the archipelago.
And he says 500,000 of these petroglyphs are estimated to be on the Burrup Peninsula, where Woodside Energy was recently granted permission from the Western Australian government to begin development of a natural gas project.
"It's basically the largest collection of rock carvings in one location," says Chapple.
The report says some of the oldest of the carvings, which are tens of thousands of years old, include those of archaic faces.
And there are also depictions of animals that disappeared long before Europeans arrived on the continent.
For example, there are carvings of thylacines, which have been extinct on the mainland for 3000 years. 
Other evidence of prehistoric human activity on the archipelago includes food preparation sites, quarries, stone arrangements and terraces.
"It's a bit like walking into the Mary Celeste," says Chapple. "You've got this whole feeling like you're actually in someone's living room."

The last Neanderthals holed up in Gibraltar, a refuge on the balmy southern tip of Europe, until their lineage withered away, scientists say
Neanderthals lived in southern Europe as recently as 28,000 years ago, had a varied diet and used sophisticated tools and weapons, scientists say.
Homo neanderthalensis was thought to have survived in Europe until the arrival of modern humans about 30,000 years ago.
But new findings by Professor Clive Finlayson of the Gibraltar Museum show the two groups may have coexisted in Europe for 4000 years or longer. 
"We are showing quite clearly that they survived at the very least until 28,000 years ago and possibly as recently as 24,000 years. That is significantly later than previously thought," Finlayson says.
With Europe in the grip of an Ice Age and with their smarter cousins, Homo sapiens, spreading across the continent, the last Neanderthals holed up in a refuge on the balmy southern tip of Europe until their lineage withered away, the study says.
Neanderthals were predecessors of modern humans who inhabited Europe and parts of west and central Asia.
Despite their image as club-carrying, hairy brutes, research suggests they were expert tool makers, used animal skins to keep warm and may have cared for each other.
During a new excavation at Gorham's Cave, a rich source of prehistoric artefacts in Gibraltar, Finlayson found a campfire made by Neanderthals and remains of tools, flint weapons and animal fossils. 
Remains included those of mammals, birds and shellfish, Finlayson says.
Charcoal found at the site enabled the scientists to date it. They were also able to reconstruct the environment in which the late Neanderthals lived and found it included a variety of plants.
"It indicates to us that in spite of the glaciations further up in Europe, this was a place where the climate was still sufficiently mild for populations of Neanderthals to survive quite late," adds Finlayson, whose findings are reported online by the journal Nature.
"The last Neanderthals that occupied Gorham's Cave had access to a diverse community of plants and vertebrates on the sandy plains, open woodland and shrubland, wetlands, cliff and coastal environments surrounding the site," the study says. 
"Such ecological diversity might have facilitated their long survival." 
The scientists are excavating further in the cave where stone tools were discovered more than 50 years ago. They will also be looking for Neanderthal burial sites in the cave's deeper parts.
Co-existing with humans
How long Neanderthals and modern humans coexisted in the same geographical area is a subject of much debate, with some researchers suggesting it could have been as short as 2000 years. 
"Here we are looking at 4000 years, if not more, and that is a long time" says Finlayson.
"It sounds like very little, but if you transpose it into human generations today, 4000 years is from the time of Christ to the present and back," he adds. 
What happened to Neanderthals then?
As to the great whodunnit of palaeontology, the paper discounts the theory that these Neanderthals were annihilated by H. sapiens in the competition for food and territory.
Evidence of stone-age technology at Malaga, about 100 kilometres east of Gibraltar, shows that anatomically modern man had ventured into the neighbourhood at the time when the Neanderthals lived in Gorham Cave. 
This suggests that for several thousand years the region was a 'mosaic' of remnant Neanderthals and pioneering H. sapiens living in thinly-scattered communities.
Neanderthal DNA in modern humans?
Another theory to explain the disappearance of the Neanderthals is that they did not disappear, not genetically, at any rate. 
Under this hypothesis, Neanderthals and H. sapiens co-mingled. Far from being a dead branch of the human tree, the Neanderthals may even have bequeathed some of the traits in the H. sapiens genome that we see today.
The new paper does not address this controversial theory, but notes there is no evidence of "transitional" tools or activities at the cave. 
This adds weight to the argument that the last Neanderthals had only limited contact with H. sapiens, so interbreeding was unlikely.
The first evidence for the Neanderthals emerged in 1856, when workers at a lime quarry in the Neander Valley, western Germany, came across bones initially thought to be that of a bear.
Since then, the remains of about 400 Neanderthals have been found, at sites ranging from southern England to continental Europe and the Middle East.

These magnetic patches cause variations in the Sun's brightness. But research released today says these variations are not enough to cause climate change
The Sun's energy output has barely varied over the past 1000 years, according to a study that weakens claims that climate change is due to natural sunspot cycles.
An international team of researchers found that the Sun's brightness varies by only 0.07% over 11-year sunspot cycles, far too little to account for the rise in temperatures since the Industrial Revolution. 
"Our results imply that over the past century climate change due to human influences must far outweigh the effects of changes in the Sun's brightness," says Australian born Dr Tom Wigley of the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 
Many scientists say that emissions of greenhouse gases, mainly from burning fossil fuels in power plants, factories and cars, are the main cause of a 0.6&deg;C rise in temperatures over the past century. 
A smaller group of scientists says that the dominant cause of warming is a natural variation in the climate system, or a gradual rise in the Sun's energy output.
"The solar contribution to warming over the past 30 years is negligible," the researchers write in the journal Nature, based on evidence from satellite observations since 1978.
They also found little sign of solar warming or cooling when they checked telescope observations of sunspots against temperature records going back to the 17th century. 
They then checked more ancient evidence of rare isotopes and temperatures trapped in sea sediments and Greenland and Antarctic ice and also found no dramatic shifts in solar energy output for at least the past millennium.  
Sun not guilty, says study
"This basically rules out the Sun as the cause of global warming," says Dr Henk Spruit, a co-author of the report from the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Germany. 
Spruit says a Little Ice Age around the 17th century, when London's Thames River froze, seemed limited mainly to western Europe and so was not a planet-wide cooling that might have implied a dimmer Sun. 
And global Ice Ages, like the last one that ended about 10,000 years ago, seem linked to cyclical shifts in the Earth's orbit around the Sun rather than to changes in solar output.
"Overall, we can find no evidence for solar luminosity variations of sufficient amplitude to drive significant climate variations on centennial, millennial or even million-year time scales," the report says. 
Solar activity is now around a low on the 11-year cycle after a 2000 peak, when bright spots called faculae emit more heat and outweigh the heat-plugging effect of dark sunspots.
Both faculae and dark sunspots are most common at the peaks. 
Still, the report also says there could be other, more subtle solar effects on the climate, such as from cosmic rays or ultraviolet radiation. It says they would be hard to detect.

The double-pulsar system put Einstein's theory of general relativity through its paces, with what's believed to be the most stringent test yet
Pulses of radiation emitted from a pair of distant stars have confirmed that Einstein's theory of general relativity is at least 99.95% right, scientists say.
An international research team including scientists working at Australia's Parkes telescope measured the radiation from a 'double pulsar' system 2000 light-years away to put the theory through its paces.
According to results published online today in the journal Science, the 91-year-old theory came through with top marks.
"General relativity has passed all our tests," says co-author Dr George Hobbs from the Australia Telescope National Facility.
The double pulsar system, called PSR J0737-3039A and B, consists of two highly compact neutron stars, each of which weighs more than our own Sun but measures only about 20 kilometres across.
The two stars whirl around each other at a million kilometres an hour, emitting lighthouse-like beams of radio waves.
Researchers used three of the world's largest radio telescopes, the UK's Lovell Telescope at Jodrell Bank, the Parkes radio telescope and the Robert C Byrd Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia in the US, to observe those beams over a period of three years.
Their measurements offered a number of ways to test the accuracy of the theory of general relativity.
The most precise is called the Shapiro delay, and concerns Einstein's prediction that massive objects warp space-time.
"Einstein says that the whole concept of space and time are connected and that gravitational fields warp both of them," explains Hobbs.
This means that when one pulsar passes behind the other, its signal travels through the warped space-time created by the one in the foreground.
Using Einstein's theory, the researchers calculated that this warping would add a 90 microsecond delay to the arrival of the signal on Earth, which is just what their measurements found.
"The first thing to say is that the prediction and the measurement agree," Hobbs says.
"But it isn't possible for our measurement to be 100% precise."
What the scientists can say for certain is that Einstein's theory is accurate to at least within 0.05%.
"General relativity is used in astronomy all the time, on the assumption that it is correct," says Hobbs.
"This is the most stringent test ever made of it in the presence of a very strong gravitational field."

Nanotechnology involves manipulating matter at the atomic or molecular level
A nine-point plan for the responsible development of nanotechnology in Australia has been recommended in a new report. But environmental and worker safety groups are still not happy.
The industry minister Ian Macfarlane this week released the report, which he will consider when establishing a national nanotechnology strategy.
It recommends the establishment of a dedicated office within a federal department that will be responsible for the nanotechnology strategy, although it does not recommend which portfolio this should fall under.
The report states that there is no case for establishing new, nanotechnology-specific regulations to protect human health and the environment, but suggests existing regulations may need adjusting.
The Options for a National Nanotechnology Strategy report also recommends further research into the health, safety and environmental implications of nanotechnology.
And it recommends that any proposed changes to regulatory frameworks should "not add unnecessary regulatory burden to industry".
Nanoparticle risk
Australian Council of Trade Unions occupational health and safety officer, Steve Mullins, supports the establishment of a specific office to oversee nanotechnology.
But he criticises the report's failure to recommend the establishment of new regulations specific to nanotechnology.
"It seems like business has the green light to use nanotechnology but they've got a red light on health and safety regulation," he says.
The unions are particularly concerned about the exposure of workers to nanoparticles and believe precautionary measures should be taken to ensure this is minimised.
"By all means, continue research," says Mullins. "But we've got enough evidence to suggest nanoparticles can have a toxic effect on the body."
Georgia Miller of the Friends of the Earth's nanotechnology project also criticises the report.
She says it fails to require safety testing of nanoparticles before they are commercialised, as recommended by the UK's Royal Society in 2004.
She says there should be a moratorium on r&d and manufacture on nanotechnology until safety issues are resolved.

The celestial body now known as Eris with her moon Dysnomia
'Xena', the lonely rock at the edge of the solar system that caused Pluto's downfall has now been officially named Eris after the Greek goddess of strife.
"Eris caused strife and discord by causing quarrels among people and that's what this one has done too," says Assistant Professor Mike Brown, the California Institute of Technology researcher who discovered the object. 
Brown's discovery, larger and further from the Sun than Pluto, set off a heated debate about what should be considered a planet. 
The 2500 members of the International Astronomical Union decided last month to downgrade Pluto to a 'dwarf planet', leaving only eight full planets in the solar system.
Many scientists have not accepted the change. 
Eris, pronounced EE-ris, is also considered a dwarf planet. The most distant known solar system object from the Sun, it takes 557 years to complete an orbit.
Unlike Pluto, its orbit does not cross paths with Neptune, the most distant full-sized planet. 
The body was dubbed 2003 UB313 after it was discovered. Brown nicknamed it Xena, after the television warrior princess. But he says he didn't consider that to be an appropriate formal name for a celestial body.
"Then the next one would be Spock or something, and that wouldn't be quite so dignified," Brown says.
The astronomers' union accepted Eris this week. The group also accepted Brown's proposed name for Eris's moon Dysnomia. 
Dysnomia is Eris's daughter in Greek mythology, and the word means lawlessness in Greek.
"It sounds like a disease. But in any case we all liked it," says Dr Ted Bowell, an astronomer at Lowell Observatory in Arizona who heads the division of the astronomers' union that deals with planets.
Brown says he plans to study Eris and Dysnomia further to figure out the dwarf planet's mass and density.
Greek mythology
In Greek mythology, Eris started the Trojan war after she was excluded from a wedding on Mount Olympus, home of the gods.
To get revenge, she tossed an apple inscribed "to the most beautiful one" into the party, causing a squabble among the goddesses. 
Paris, the prince of Troy, was forced to settle the dispute by picking one goddess as most beautiful, earning the spite of the others and the ultimate defeat of his city in the Trojan war.

Chlamydia infects the back of the crocodiles' throats, causing an inflammation that blocks the airway
Chlamydia is suffocating thousands of young, farmed crocodiles in Australia's north, say experts.
Dr Ian Jerrett, senior veterinary pathologist at the Northern Territory government's Berrimah Veterinary Laboratories, says the disease is killing saltwater crocodiles (Crocodilus porosus).
"I think it's the first very serious disease of crocodiles that we've recognised since farming started," Jerrett says.
