The scientists observed yellow and white fungi on the deceased's chest, abdomen and thighs, but little insect infestation, probably because the house was dry and isolated.
The second case study involved skeletal remains clad in a shirt and pants found in a forest.
Forensics specialists determined the body belonged to a 50 to 60-year-old man who had died at least 6 months before the body's discovery. The scientists once again detected yellow and white fungi growing on the corpse.
Back in the lab
Ishii and his team collected the fungi and incubated them in a laboratory.
They identified several species including Gliocladium, a slimy counterpart to penicillin; Eurotium chevalieri, a fungus that can be bright yellow; and E. repens, which is commonly found in soil. The Eurotium species dominated the collected samples.
Ishii explains that the white and yellow colours are associated with the sexual stages for Eurotium fungi.
The parasite produces threadlike filaments that terminate with circular, colourful structures called ascomata that are involved in reproduction.
The fungi also produce colourful conidia, or asexual spores, which tend to form in the morning and germinate in the afternoon and evening.
Ishii says the environment in which a body lies, rather than the biochemistry of the individual or the manner of death, tends to dictate how much or how little fungi will colonise a cadaver.
Flies, beetles, fungi
Yuichi Chigusa, a medical parasitologist and entomologist at Dokkyo Medical University's School of Medicine, says that fly larvae usually infest corpses within an hour to a half-day after the victims' death. They are then followed by Coleoptera (beetles) and fungi.
He is excited about the potential of fungi for further aiding detective work.
"I am surprised that fungus is a potential tool for determining post mortem intervals in cadavers without infestation of dipteran larvae and/or beetles," Chigusa says. 
"Therefore, I think it is very important that forensic pathologists, forensic entomologists and forensic mycologists cooperate in determining post mortem intervals during forensic analysis."

These flat-headed dinosaurs went head-to-head 66 million years ago
A dragon-like dinosaur named after Harry Potter's alma mater has performed a bit of black magic on its own family tree, say US palaeontologists who unveiled the 'Dragon King of Hogwarts'.
The newly described horny-headed dinosaur Dracorex hogwartsia lived about 66 million years ago in South Dakota, just a million years short of the extinction of all dinosaurs.
But its flat, almost storybook-style dragon head has overturned everything palaeontologists thought they knew about the dome-head dinos called pachycephalosaurs.
"What you knew about pachycephalosaurs, you can chuck it," says Dr Spencer Lucas, curator of palaeontology at the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science in Albuquerque.
"Dracorex hogwartsia is a rather fantastic new dinosaur," affirms palaeontologist Dr Robert Sullivan of the State Museum of Pennsylvania.
For years dinosaur experts had thought the classic dome-headed, head-butting sorts of pachycephalosaurs evolved from earlier flat-headed ancestors.
The last thing they expected to find at the end of the Age of Dinosaurs was a dramatically flat-headed pachycerphalosaurs, or pachy.
"If you were going to predict the kind of dinosaur that would live at that time, it would not be this," says Lucas.
Without so much as a nod of the head or the waving of a wand, hogwartsia has reversed the pachy family tree.
"Instead of going from flat-headed to domed, you're going from dome-headed to flat," says Sullivan.
Along with several colleagues, Sullivan co-authored the first detailed study of the new dinosaur, published recently in the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin.
Dracorex hogwartsia, which translates to Dragon King of Hogwarts, was unearthed in 2003 in the Hell Creek Formation of South Dakota by three amateur fossil hunters working with the Children's Museum of Indianapolis. 
But it wasn't until it was at the museum, while the fossil was being carefully prepared, that renowned dinosaur researcher Dr Robert Bakker happened to catch sight of it while visiting.
Bakker then recruited pachycerphalosaurs expert Sullivan and other palaeontologists to take a closer look.
How to name a dinosaur
But how did it get its name? A group of children at the Children's Museum of Indianapolis drew the connection to the fanciful school of witchcraft that the famous fictional wizard Harry Potter attends and came up with the name hogwartsia.
"It's a very dragon-like looking dinosaur," says Sullivan.
J.K. Rowling, author of the Harry Potter series, has been notified and apparently rather likes the new name.
"I am absolutely thrilled to think that Hogwarts has made a small claw mark upon the fascinating world of dinosaurs," says Rowling in a statement.
"I happen to know more on the subject of palaeontology than many might credit, because my eldest daughter was Utahraptor-obsessed and I am now living with a passionate Tyrannosaurus rex-lover, aged three.
"My credibility has soared within my science-loving family, and I am very much looking forward to reading Dr Bakker and his colleague's paper describing 'my' dinosaur."

Exercise seems to put a brake on runaway cell growth, one of the hallmarks of cancer
The anticancer effects of exercise are due to increases in a protein that blocks cell growth and induces cell death, say Australian researchers.
This would slow down runaway cell growth, one of the hallmarks of cancer, the researchers suggest.
But the team, led by Dr Andrew Haydon from Monash Medical School in Melbourne, cannot say how much exercise someone needs to show these effects.
The researchers publish their results in the May issue of the journal Gut.
They identified new cases of colorectal cancer in a prospective study of 41,528 adults recruited between 1990 and 1994. 
They then looked at baseline body mass index, level of physical activity reported and compared baseline levels of two proteins: insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3, or IGFBP-3, and insulin-like growth factor-1, or IGF-1.
Analyses centered on 443 colon cancer patients followed for more than 5 years. 
Among subjects who were physically active, an increase in IGFBP-3 was associated with a 48% reduction in colon cancer-specific deaths. There seemed to be no association with IGF-1. 
For the physically inactive, there was no association between IGF-1 or IGFBP-3 and colon cancer survival.
The researchers conclude that increased levels of IGFBP-3 with exercise blocks IGF-1's proliferative effect on cell growth.
IGF-1 has been shown to stimulate cell growth, inhibit cell death, and promote angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels, which tumors need to grow. 
"We did not look at the amount of physical activity needed to reduce colorectal cancer incidence," Haydon points out. 
"Other studies ... have shown a dose-effect, meaning the more exercise the lower the risk. However, our study did not try to address this issue.
"We were examining the effect of physical activity on one's prognosis following a diagnosis of bowel cancer and the possible mechanisms behind this effect." 
For more information about cancer, including fact sheets and where to go for counselling, see the Cancer Council Australia website.

Elephants, snakes and octopus tentacles have inspired a new type of flexible robot
A robot with a flexible, trunk-like arm could one day work like an elephant to grasp unwieldy loads, say its developers.
It could also navigate like a snake through the rubble of a disaster zone, or feel around inside the dark crevasses of other planets.
Conventional robots have rigid joints; picture a crane-like appendage with a claw-shaped hand.
But the OctArm's nimble design allows it to move freely and adapt to its surroundings.
"These robots are invertebrate robots and are good at getting into tight spaces and wriggling around," says Ian Walker, a professor of electrical and computer engineering.
His team at Clemson University in South Carolina has been working on the project for nearly 10 years.
Conventional robots work best when given a predictable job in a structured setting, such as a factory assembly line. 
But in the unpredictable, unstructured environment of a disaster zone or the surface of a distant planet, a more flexible robot is needed.
Walker and a team of researchers from eight institutions in the US and Israel built a strong, dexterous robotic arm that uses tubes pumped with compressed air to mimic the muscles that control tongues, trunks and tentacles.
A scientist uses a joystick to the control the OctArm, which resembles an elephant trunk: thick at the base and tapered toward the tip.
A computer responds to the joystick's motions by changing the air pressure inside individual tubes.
For example, to move the OctArm from the extended position into a coiled shape, air pressure must be increased in the tubes on the side of the arm facing up.
Simultaneously, air pressure decreases in the tubes on the downward-facing side of the arm.
The force of increased air pressure on one side of the arm pulls it into the coiled position. To extend it again, the scientists apply air pressure the other way around.
Curling and lifting
More complicated motions, such as curling around an object and lifting, require more sophisticated computer algorithms. Developing these algorithms is one of the bigger challenges facing Walker and his team.
In field tests, the OctArm successfully grasped balls and pieces of wood, even clinging to them, while submerged in rushing water.
"The OctArms are not precise or positional, but they are compliant and flexible and can conform to crazy shapes and do some things that traditional robots can't," says Shane Farritor, associate professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
Later this year, Walker and his team will be working to improve the OctArm's precision, adding sensors and a camera.

Chances are, you'll feel good about life-defining events when you look back on them
When we remember events that helped to shape our identity, such as a break-up or marriage, we tend to downplay the fear, anger or other negative emotions and remember more of the positive ones, a new study indicates. 
"These findings suggest that healthy individuals work to build a positive narrative identity that will yield an overall optimistic tone to the most important recalled events from their lives," write study authors Drs Michael Conway and Wendy-Jo Wood of Concordia University in Montreal, Quebec. 
The findings, published in the latest issue of the Journal of Personality, may also have implications for someone's mental health. 
"Mental health is maintained or improved by people's attempts to make sense of their life experiences," Conway says. 
"People try to see the positive in even very difficult life experiences, and come to downplay, as much as they can, how negative some events were in the past," he explains. 
For their research, Conway and Wood investigated people's emotional memories for self-defining events, which they described as emotionally complex events that contribute to a person's sense of identity or overall life story. 
In one study, 279 university students were asked to think about an important past event that helped define themselves.
They were then asked to describe the event in various terms, including the extent to which it had a big impact on them and how much it helped them learn about themselves and about life. 
Based on the students' responses, Conway and Wood conclude that a person's perception of the impact of an event is a good marker for meaning making, that is the process that results in an individual integrating an event with his or her positive sense of identity. 
In a second study, 79 university students were asked to report and describe, on paper, five self-defining memories and to rate those events on a five-point scale in terms of its impact.
They also completed two questionnaires about the 10 emotions they felt when the event occurred and how they currently felt about the event, respectively. 
Happiness and pride
Conway and Wood found that when the study participants reflected on negative events, such as conflict with bosses or teachers, death, or physical or sexual assault, they reported that they currently felt less negative emotions, like anger and disgust, and more happiness and pride than they had felt at the time of the event. 
And when the students reflected on positive events, like a dating relationship or marriage, recreation, or attaining a personal goal, they reported feeling just as happy as they had felt at the time of the event, as well as similarly intense feelings of love and pride.
Again, however, they also reported feeling less anger, embarrassment, guilt and other negative emotions than they had initially felt. 
"What was striking is that the findings held up for a wide range of emotions," Conway says, adding that "when making sense of their past experiences, people would downplay all the negative types of feelings they had, such as fear and anger". 
Death in the family
How does this relate to a negative event like the death of a grandmother, for example?
"The sad event is still mostly sad," Conway says. "But the positive emotions have come out more."
People are "seeing the silver lining, so to speak" and may feel happy afterwards as they realise that the grandmother's suffering is over, he says. 
Conway says how the practice is common among men and women in a variety of life situations.
"Everyone can experience strong emotional reactions in extreme situations, and everyone needs to come to terms with such events in order to maintain a positive sense of self, and a positive sense of the world at large."

Bacteria found in household sewage can generate their own electricity. Now scientists say they are one step closer to harnessing it
The waste water we flush down the loo could one day be used to generate electricity, scientists from Belgium say. 
The Ghent University researchers have designed a way to boost the output of microbial fuel cells, an emerging technology that captures the energy produced when bacteria break down waste and turn it into electrical current.
Investigators from around the world are researching the potential of microbial fuel cells, but prototypes so far have only produced tiny amounts of electricity. 
"At the moment we are still at the stage of basic research, but the potential for the technology is good," says Associate Professor Zhiguo Yuan, from the Advanced Wastewater Management Centre at Australia's University of Queensland. 
The latest paper, which appears in the journal Environmental Science and Technology, brings the concept closer to reality.
The researchers show that six small fuel cells stacked together can generate higher voltages and increased current.
"The efficiency of these systems is determined by the distances the electrons have to travel," says co-author Dr Korneel Rabaey.
"If you want to generate a lot of power from microbial fuel cells, you have to have a very thin reactor. But you also need to be able to work with a high volume of waste water." 
Putting several small cells together ticks both of those boxes, says Rabaey, who moved to the University of Queensland a month ago. "This work shows one step we need to make larger scale designs." 
But scientists aren't sure exactly which bugs generate the electricity in the fuel cells.
"There is a mixture of those that can live in that environment," says Yuan.
Treating water
Scientists are most interested in using microbe-generated electricity to power the water treatment process itself.
As well as producing current, the technology can also help clear bacteria out of the water. It might also clean out substances like sulfur and nitrogen.
Once scientists figure out how to build large-scale fuel cells, Rabaey says, the cells will probably be used first to treat industrial waste water.
The idea of using stuff we flush down the toilet to power our light bulbs is probably a more distant hope. But he says it is not out of the question.
"The amount of energy that is in waste is incredible," he says. "Just one sugar-cube, for example, has enough energy to power a laptop for 12 hours. And the stuff in our waste water is just different forms of sugar."

Locusts reach a critical point when they 'know' when to swarm
Like an army preparing for battle, locusts instinctively wait until their 'battalion' is large enough before falling into line and swarming ahead en masse, researchers find.
The apparently leaderless group will fly around chaotically until the swarm reaches a certain density of numbers, when they immediately assemble and become an orderly, collective plague.
Researchers led by Dr Jerome Buhl from Australia's University of Sydney have pinpointed this exact point of change, called the tipping point, by using statistical physics models of disordered and ordered particles.
The international team publishes its findings today in the journal Science.
The researchers assembled a circular perspex 'arena' shaped liked a Mexican hat in the laboratory.
Locusts were then released into the arena and their movements filmed as more and more locusts were added to the group.
The team found that at a low density of insects, the locusts swarmed around chaotically.
At intermediate density the locusts banded together but changed their marching directions quickly.
But when enough insects were released into the arena to reach the critical tipping point - 20 insects per square metre - the group immediately massed together and swarmed as one in a persistent direction.
Co-author Professor Steve Simpson from the University of Sydney says the statistical physics models of disordered and ordered particles used in the experiment are like dodgem cars racing around an arena.
"You give these dodgem cars a set of simple local rules. If somebody drives past them they must move and follow next to them. If they see a dodgem car a little further away then they must move towards them. If they get too close to another dodgem car they must bounce away from it," he says.
"If you scale that up to a whole bunch of dodgem cars, or particles, or locusts then as you start to add more and more to the arena, or environment, you suddenly get to a number where they all start moving in the same direction together."
Buhl says the laboratory findings reflect similar findings in the field.
He says the research, which was carried out with UK, US and Canadian researchers, could be useful in controlling pest outbreaks that devastate crops and bring disease.

The new test is based on a stain that detects the protein keratin. Vaginal cells, seen here, don't express the protein, giving a characteristic yellow colour. But skin cells and some mouth cells do, so they stain magenta and red
A new forensic technique that tells scientists which cells come from which parts of the body could help solve sex crimes, its developers say.
A New Zealand PhD student has found a simple way of identifying whether cell samples collected for DNA testing come from the skin, mouth or vagina.
"All it really involves is a couple of stains and some microscope slides of the cell samples and you get some lovely different coloured cells," says Claire French, from the University of Auckland.
Currently, DNA from cells found at a crime scene can link a person to the crime but cannot provide evidence about which part of the body the cells came from.
The technique French has developed involves staining epithelial cells, the outer layer of body surfaces and organs, which are easily shed or secreted.
The stain reveals different colours, corresponding to the presence of the protein keratin.
Skin cells express keratin and stain magenta; vaginal cells don't express keratin and stain orange; and cells in the mouth vary depending on their location, and stain red.
Sue Vintiner, a forensic scientist with New Zealand's Environmental Science and Research (ESR), says the technology could have practical applications.
"I've been involved in cases where we've been unable to scientifically prove that an object ... has been used to violate someone in a sexual assault or whether it was just touched by the alleged victim," she says. "Claire's work could change that."
Its developers say the technology could be used to develop a portable, histological staining kit for routine use at crime scenes and in forensic laboratories.
The research, which will soon be presented at the European Academy of Forensic Sciences conference, has received strong support from the New Zealand Police.
Claire's findings have also earned her New Zealand's McDiarmid Young Scientist of the Year Award.
The intellectual property underpinning the research has been jointly protected by ESR and the University of Auckland.

Poison ivy, a species introduced to Australia and now a weed, will grow faster and become more poisonous with increased CO2 levels
Add another item to the list of health threats posed by global warming: poison ivy that's more poisonous, and lots more of it. 
When scientists increased CO2 to the levels expected to be seen at the middle of this century, poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans) grew more than twice as fast.
The plants also produced more of a type of urushiol, the substance that causes an allergic reaction, the researchers report online in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
"This is bad news for those of us who suffer from poison ivy," says lead author Dr Jacqueline Mohan of the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts.
Mohan and her team studied plots of a forested area surrounded by PVC pipes that pumped out CO2, allowing them evaluate the effects of the greenhouse gas in a real-life forest environment.
They compared poison ivy growth over a six-year period in three CO2-enriched areas and three areas with normal air. 
Under the high-CO2 conditions, the poison ivy plants grew 150% faster every year than the control plants. The plants also contained 153% more of the urushiol compound that causes an allergic reaction.
More than 80% of the world's population will develop an itchy rash if exposed to poison ivy. 
Over the past two decades, Mohan notes, scientists have observed increased worldwide growth in vines, which is in some cases choking out the regrowth of trees.
Vines benefit from extra CO2, she explains, as the gas fuels photosynthesis. Unlike trees, vines have to devote relatively little energy to growing wood, and can instead pump the extra photosynthesis energy into leaf production.

A seed bank, to be built in the Artic, will be essential to protect future agriculture, its proponents say
A frozen Noah's Ark to safeguard the world's crop seeds from disasters will be built on a remote Arctic island off Norway, the Norwegian government says.
Construction of the Global Seed Vault, in a mountainside on the island of Svalbard 1000 kilometres from the North Pole, would start in June with completion due in September 2007.
"Norway will by this contribute to the global system for ensuring the diversity of food plants. A Noah's Ark on Svalbard if you will," says Norwegian Agriculture and Food Minister Terje Riis-Johansen.
The doomsday vault would be built near Longyaerbyen, Svalbard's main village, with space for three million seed varieties.
It would store seeds including rice, wheat, and barley as well as fruits and vegetables. 
It would be a remote Arctic back-up for scores of other seed banks around the world, which may be more vulnerable to risks ranging from nuclear war to mundane power failures. 
"Gene banks can be affected by shutdowns, natural disasters, wars or simply a lack of money," Riis-Johansen says. 
Loss of genetic diversity would mean losing a part of cultural heritage.
"We also reduce the ability of agriculture to meet new challenges relating to climate change, population increase, and so on," he says. 
The seeds would be stored at -18&deg;C. If the power fails, the seeds will probably stay frozen. 
"The temperature there is around -3&deg;C, -4&deg;C in the summer but we believe that even if the freezers broke down a suitable temperature would last for months," says Grethe Helene Evjen, a senior adviser at the agriculture ministry. 
"This will be primarily a duplicate storage for plant seeds already stored elsewhere," she says.
Seeds would remain the property of nations making deposits. 
Norway would provide 30 million Norwegian crowns (U$4.94 million) to build the vault. 
Norway has long talked of building the Arctic seed vault without previously taking action.
For about 15 years some varieties of seed have been stored in a disused Svalbard mine under a plan to see if they can germinate after 100 years. 
Norway has worked with the UN Food and Agriculture Organization on the plans.
It would also get financial support from the Global Crop Diversity Trust to help poor countries use the storage.

Is technology a match for evolution? And does this mean that modern humans are still evolving?
New evidence that the hobbit made the stone tools found alongside it might be evidence that humans are still evolving, says an Australian researcher.
The use of technology doesn't mean we have outwitted evolutionary selection pressures, says Dr Mark Moore, an expert on ancient stone flaking technology at the University of New England.
He made the comments in light of research published in today's issue of the journal Nature on how early hominids used tools on the Indonesian island of Flores.
Some scientists have recently argued that the tools found alongside the hobbit at the Liang Bua cave are too complex to have been made by anyone but modern humans.
But Moore, along with Australian and Indonesian colleagues, think otherwise.
The team analysed the techniques used to make over 500 tools found at Mata Menge, a site about 50 kilometres from where the hobbit was found.
The researchers say although the tools would have been made 700,000 years before the hobbit was around, they seemed just as complex as the ones found alongside it.
The researchers say the tools were probably made by ancestors of Homo floresiensis, suggesting a long history of toolmaking on the island.
This supports the idea that the hobbit, even with its small brain, was capable of making the tools found alongside it, says Moore.
He previously reported that such tools could be made without the degree of forethought usually associated with modern humans.
"The techniques used to make [the tools] aren't quite as sophisticated as a lot of archaeologists would have you believe," says Moore.
"They are certainly within the capabilities of a small-brained hominid."
Implications for evolution
Those who discovered the hobbit believe it evolved from a larger bodied, larger brained ancestor that shrank over time as it was isolated on the island.
The fact that the hominid could still make stone tools despite its shrinking brain suggests toolmaking was key to survival on the island.
This supports the argument that technology helps humans survive changing environments. 
But Moore thinks it also tells us that technology doesn't protect us from evolutionary selection pressures, like predators or other environmental factors that affect our survival.
The environment is a bigger force than we give it credit for, he says.
"There's an underlying assumption in the popular media, in particular, and amongst some scientists, that since we adapt to our environment through technology that somehow this is buffering us from the forces of natural selection," says Moore.
But, he says, the use of technology by the hobbit's ancestors to adapt to their environment did not stop them from shrinking in response to selection pressures.
"Even thought they had a technological adaptation to the environment it didn't mean that they had stopped evolving," says Moore. "They clearly had continued evolving. Technology was not able to stop that from happening."
He says this could be relevant to current debates over whether modern humans are evolving.
"We are so surrounded by technology every day," says Moore. "But that doesn't necessarily mean that the environment isn't also having an effect."

Saturn's moon Enceladus might have rolled or rotated itself to place an area of low density at the south pole. This illustrates the moon's interior, with warm, low-density material rising to the surface (yellow) from within or from its rocky core (red)
Millions of years ago, Saturn's moon Enceladus may have somersaulted in space, creating an ice-spewing hot spot on the moon's south pole, scientists suggest.
For now, it is the only explanation why the small satellite sports a very active, though isolated, polar region.
Dr Francis Nimmo, an assistant professor at the University of California at Santa Cruz, and team publish their research today in the journal Nature.
During flybys of Enceladus, the Saturn-orbiting Cassini probe has snapped pictures of gigantic icy plumes, indicating active geysers at the moon's south pole.
Researchers who have been studying images and other data collected by the Cassini spacecraft believe a relatively warm blob of ice rose from beneath the moon's frozen surface.
It could also have emerged from within its frigid and rocky core.
Less dense than the surrounding terrain, the blob would be more susceptible to Saturn's powerful gravitational tug on Enceladus, a grip that at one time seems to have caused the moon to roll over, says Nimmo.
The team calculated the effects of a low-density blob beneath the surface of Enceladus and showed it could cause the moon to roll over by up to 30&deg; and put the blob at the pole.
It may not have been a solitary incident either, Nimmo says.
"It could be like a lava lamp and each time a blob is reproduced, it causes the moon to flip," he says.
The manoeuver may not be all that uncommon. Studies of magnetically charged particles around Earth show evidence that the planet's north pole may at one time have resided elsewhere, Nimmo adds.
Likewise, Uranus's moon Miranda shows evidence of multiple flips, he says.
The researchers plan follow-up studies to look for more evidence. 
First, they want to carefully examine surface images for craters. The moon should be more heavily cratered in the areas that face its direction of travel.
If Enceladus flipped, it's current face should show fewer impacts than its trailing regions, which at one time may have been facing forward.
The pull of gravity
The team also would like to fly Cassini low over Enceladus' southern pole to see if its gravitational pull is slightly weaker than at other parts of the moon. 
Cassini would become the test object while radio antennas on Earth track its movement during the flyby.
A minute change in Cassini's speed, perhaps as small as a centimetre per second, would be an indication of a lower-mass region at the pole.
"It's a difficult measurement to make, but we'd like to try," Nimmo says.
Scientists are not sure what mechanism fuels Enceladus' hot spot, but they believe it is tied to tidal forces from Saturn and possibly a sister moon, Janus.
"You have this tiny moon blasting out a huge amount of heat," Nimmo says. "Presumably it has to get squeezed. Something is causing all this pushing and pulling.
"It's astounding that Cassini found a region of current geological activity on an icy moon that we would expect to be frigidly cold, especially down at this moon's equivalent of Antarctica," adds co-author Dr Robert Pappalardo, a planetary scientist and assistant professor at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

It took just 10 million years for the Artic Ocean to go from bath-temperature to frigid
Dramatic shifts in Earth's climate system drove the sea at the North Pole from sub-tropical temperatures to icy chill in the relatively brief span of 10 million years, according to a series of studies.
The papers report a mission in which European scientists aboard a ship braved flowing walls of ice to delve deep into the Lomonosov ridge on the floor of the Arctic Ocean. 
The precious cores of sediment, retrieved from up to 430 metres below the seabed, give an idea of the planet's climate going back 55 million years thanks to the fossilised creatures, plants and stones buried in them. 
This surveyed period kicks off with an astonishingly warm period called the Palaeocene-Eocene thermal maximum. At one point during this era, the Arctic Ocean was 23&deg;C.
Then, around 49 million years ago, large volumes of cool freshwater for some reason were dumped into the Arctic, chilling the sea to around 10&deg;C and diluting its saltiness so much that in summer months, a species of green freshwater fern covered much of its surface. 
At 45 million years ago, the first ice started to form, as evidenced by pebbles dropped by icebergs, and the relative cooling has continued to the modern era. 
The studies, published today the journal Nature, were carried out in an initiative called Arctic Coring Expedition.
A Swedish-flagged, Norwegian-operated drillship, the Vidar Viking, manoeuvred in water 1000 metres deep just 238 kilometres from the North Pole, protected by a Russian and a Swedish icebreaker.
"At times, the drill site was covered with ice 2-3 metres thick," says one of the lead authors, Jan Blackman, a professor at Stockholm University. 
"We encountered an icefloe of multi-year ice, harder and denser than ice from just one Arctic winter. It was like driving into a brick wall." 
Natural shifts in climate
In a history spanning some 4.5 billion years, Earth has gone through natural shifts in climate change. 
The drivers for this include changes in solar radiation, surges in volcanic activity, releases of methane stored underground, shifts in vegetation and the light that is reflected back into space by polar icecaps. 
The study delves into the distant past and does not cover recent history, especially the Industrial Revolution, whose fossil-fuel emissions many blame for global warming. 
Evidence has accumulated in recent years that Arctic ice cover is thinning and shrinking in response to this warming, which in turn may have a big impact on polar bears and other species. 
The icecap at the North Pole floats on the Arctic Ocean, which means its melting does not affect global sea levels. 
In Antarctica, it lies mainly on rock, which means that even a partial melting would threaten coastal cities and deltas around the world.

Bushfire smoke hangs over Sydney 
Climate change could lead to a 20% increase in the area burned by bushfire in Sydney by the middle of this century, Australian research shows.
This does not necessarily mean new land will be affected. The increase may instead be due to some areas being burnt more frequently.
Fire ecologist, Professor Ross Bradstock, of the University of Wollongong will report his findings at the  Australasian Bushfire Conference 2006 in Brisbane next week.
Sydney's changing fire regime is important to understand because it's Australia's most populated city, says Bradstock, which itself increases a city's risk of bushfires.
Sydney is also ringed by fire-prone vegetation, and has a fire-friendly climate and layout. For instance, a lot of the city is in the path of fire-bearing winds.
"It's the biggest fire game in the country," says Bradstock.
In the past 20 years, around a million hectares of Sydney's have been burned by bushfire, including areas in the Greater Blue Mountains World Heritage Area.
And research published earlier this year suggests Sydney's fire risk is getting worse, says Bradstock.
Researchers at CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology analysed climate change models and predicted by 2050 there would be a 5-12% increase in the number of days with a high, very high or extreme fire danger. 
"That means an increase in the chance of having conditions which are conducive to major fires," says Bradstock.
Major fires, those that burn 1000 hectares or more, are only a minor proportion of the total number of fires but account for 95% of the area burned, he says.
Shift in fire weather
Bradstock wanted to find out how this shift in fire weather would translate in terms of the actual increase in number of fires and the area burnt.
To do this, he developed a model that combined the CSIRO and meteorology bureau predictions with historical records of fires from the Blue Mountains area to the west and the Central Coast area to the north of Sydney.
The models show the relationship between worsening fire weather and number of major fires is not linear.
Bradstock says the models show that while a 5% increase in high-risk days would result in a 2-6% increase in the area burned, a 12% increase in high-risk days would result in a 15-20% increase in area burned.
Over the 20 years between 2050 and 2070, he says this would equate to up to 150,000 more hectares than was burned over the past 20 years.
Bradstock says the Central Coast area is most vulnerable because it has a hotter and drier environment and a greater density of people living close to bushland.
This is the first time such an approach has been used in Australia and can be transferred to other locations, says Bradstock.
He developed the model in his previous job at the New South Wales Department of Environment and Conservation.

Where people live will have a big impact on how technology will affect their lives, says a new report that highlights the technological divide
Australia is among countries that will gain the most from technology by 2020, a study finds. But poorer countries look to miss out.
The RAND Corporation study finds that it is countries that are already on technology's cutting edge, not those that are currently lagging in technological advances, which will benefit the most.
"Where people live will have a big impact on how technology applications affect their personal health and standard of living, and will also play a part in determining the ability of their countries to protect them and their environment," says Dr Richard Silberglitt, one of the lead authors. 
The study looked at 29 countries that were ranked as technologically advanced, proficient, developing or lagging.
"People in the US and Canada, Germany [representing western Europe], South Korea and Japan, Australia and Israel will benefit the most from advances in technology, and they will be able to exploit technology regardless of its sophistication," the report concludes.
As examples of potential high-tech advances, it cites growing tissue to implant and replace human body parts; creating pervasive sensor networks in public areas to conduct real-time surveillance; providing access to information any time and anywhere; and creating wearable computers. 
"China, India, Russia and others ... such as Poland [representing eastern Europe] could also make significant advances, along with simpler ones," the report says of what it describes as scientifically proficient countries.
These countries could, for example, "provide their people with drug therapies that preferentially attack specific tumors or pathogens ... [and] vastly improved medical diagnostic and surgical procedures". 
Scientifically developing countries "Mexico, Turkey, Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia, South Africa and Chile ... are poised to take advantage of modestly sophisticated technology applications including devices to constantly track the movement of everything from products to people; easy-to-use health diagnostic tests that give immediate results for a large range of infections; and environmentally friendly manufacturing methods," the study says. 
The scientifically lagging countries - Fiji, the Dominican Republic, Georgia, Nepal, Pakistan, Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Kenya, Cameroon and Chad - "are burdened by problem-plagued political systems, a lack or resources or infrastructure, and class disparities," the study says. 
"When such countries have the will to make changes ... they can improve the lives of their citizens," the study adds, citing examples such as cheap solar energy for remote or portable applications, ways to purify water that won't require major infrastructure, and rural wireless communications. 
China and India lead the group of scientifically proficient, the study adds. 
"Yet they need to continue making progress in financial institutions, legal and policy issues rural infrastructure, environmental protection, research and development investments, rural education and literacy, and governance and stability if they are to advance," it says.

The Itokawa asteroid is made up of loosely packed bits of sand and boulders
A Japanese spacecraft that landed on an asteroid found a ball of rubble held loosely together by its own gravity, unlike other asteroids that have been visited, reports say.
The spacecraft Hayabusa, whose name means 'falcon' in Japanese, hovered over the near-Earth asteroid Itokawa last year, taking several measurements before landing briefly on the orbiting gravel pile. 
Itokawa has two parts resembling the head and body of a sea otter, according to Professor Akira Fujiwara of the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency and his colleagues in today's issue of the journal Science. 
Previously studied asteroids appear to be lumps of solid rock, but Itokawa is made up of loosely packed bits of sand and boulders, they say. 
Their findings could have implications for deflecting asteroids that might pass too closely to the Earth in the future. 
"We've never had a close-up look at such a small asteroid until now," says Dr  Takahiro Hiroi of Brown University in Rhode Island, who worked on the joint US-Japanese study.
"Large asteroids such as Eros are completely covered with a thick regolith, a blanket of looser material created by space weathering. With Itokawa, we believe we have witnessed a developing stage of the formation of this regolith." 
Itokawa is very small, just 500 metres long. But it is close, orbiting just 516 million kilometres away from Earth. Although it does not threaten to collide with Earth, it makes a tempting scientific target. 
Near miss
Hayabusa very nearly did not make it. 
The little spacecraft, now bringing a capsule of samples back to Earth, uses an electronic ion propulsion system, whose efficiency should be critical to future missions in deep space. 
At one point, Hayabusa lost communication with its controllers, writes Associate Professor Erik Asphaug of the University of California, Santa Cruz in a commentary in Science. 
"Its hydrazine [fuel] had leaked away shortly after the second sample collection attempt. Two of the reaction wheels had failed and the battery was dead. Adding insult to injury, Minerva, intended to be the first asteroid surface robot, had been released during an unexpected manoeuver and was lost to space," he adds. 
"Yet despite these heartbreaking setbacks, Hayabusa has been a stunning success both for asteroid science and for deep space concept testing." 
Asphaug says information delivered by the spacecraft "enhances our understanding of near-Earth objects. Near-Earth objects are not only important scientifically, our planet formed from them, but have also become political hot potatoes, given the growing pressure to do something to mitigate the risks they may pose to Earth". 
The spacecraft, launched in 2003, is expected to glide back to Earth in 2010 and crash-land in the Australian desert.

The search for evidence of a killer meteorite continues
Remains of what is believed to be a giant Antarctic crater could be evidence of a meteorite that caused Earth's biggest mass extinction and triggered the break up of Gondwana, scientists say. 
While some experts are excited by the find, not all are convinced this is a crater all, let alone one that came from a 48-kilometre wide meteorite that wiped out most of life on Earth.
Geophysicist Dr Ralph von Frese of Ohio State University in the US and colleagues are due to report their research at an Antarctic science meeting in Hobart early next month.
A number of suspected impact craters have been linked to the so-called Great Dying at the end of the Permian 250 million years ago. This was a time when 90% of marine life and 80% of life on land were wiped out.
But, says von Frese, his is the best candidate for the killer crater.
First, he says, the circular land features analysed in the Wilkes Land region of East Antarctica, south of Australia, suggest a big enough impact to have caused catastrophic damage to Earth.
At 480 kilometres wide, the crater would be more than twice the size of the Chicxulub crater, formed from the impact believed to have wiped out the dinosaurs much later, say the researchers.
Second, says von Frese, evidence, including its location, suggests it is older than 100 million years, the date at which Australia drifted northwards from Gondwana.
Third, the landform has a special telltale feature of impact craters at its centre, a 320 kilometre wide plug of dense material, says von Frese. This is expected to be mantle material that was sucked up as the meteorite rebounded from the Earth's surface.
This so-called mascon is a well known feature of craters on the Moon, says von Frese, who studies lunar impact craters.
And he says no other suspected craters linked to the Permian extinction show this feature.
Gravity measurements
Von Frese and team mapped the crater using two different sets of measurements.
Gravity measurements taken by NASA's Grace Satellites show a higher readings in the centre of the crater.
This corresponds to the slightly raised area of the mascon, detected by another imaging method, says von Frese.
But what was interesting was that the coastline, where Australia would have fitted together with Antarctica, took a 'bite' out of the concentric rings or shock waves, around the crater.
Von Frese says this suggests that the ocean between Antarctica and Australia opened after the crater was formed.
He thinks the meteorite that caused the crater could have hit 250 million years ago, triggering a process that culminated in the break up of Gondwana 100 or so million years later.
Mixed reception
Von Frese's report has been met with a mixed response from the Australian scientific community.
"I'm quite excited about the possibility that this is another crater," says Dr Peter Morgan, of the University of Canberra.
Morgan trained in gravity analysis at Ohio State University and says he has ground-based gravity and radar measurements of the same area.
He says he will now make it a priority to process the data and share it with the other researchers to see if it supports the theory.
Earth scientist, Professor John Talent, of Sydney's Macquarie University says before the land structure can be linked to the Permian extinction, a precise age for it is needed. 
Von Frese's team did not directly date the crater; it's almost 2.5 kilometres beneath the ice.
Talent also says that research in the past couple of years suggests the Permian extinction was a result of a number of events extending over several million years rather than an instantaneous impact.
Vulcanologist Peter Whitehead, of James Cook University in Cairns says volcanic activity played a central role in the Permian extinction. 
He says one suggestion has been that meteorite impacts send shock waves through the Earth and cause volcanic activity on the other side of the planet.

The discovery of 11,000 year old figs shows people became farmers much earlier than we once thought
Dried-up figs found in Israel may have been the first cultivated crop more than 11,000 years ago, researchers say.
The discovery, published in the journal Science, pushes back the earliest estimates of when agriculture began by 1000 years.
And it suggests that, centuries before people figured out how to plant barley and other crops, they knew how to propagate fruit trees for sweet treats, say researchers Professor Ofer Bar-Yosef of Harvard University and Israeli co-authors.
"[Some] 11,000 years ago, there was a critical switch in the human mind, from exploiting the Earth as it is to actively changing the environment to suit our needs," says Bar-Yosef, a professor of anthropology. 
"People decided to intervene in nature and supply their own food rather than relying on what was provided by the gods. This shift to a sedentary lifestyle grounded in the growing of wild crops such as barley and wheat marked a dramatic change from 2.5 million years of human history as mobile hunter-gatherers." 
People were known to have cultivated figs for thousands of years but this finding surprised even experts. 
"It is generally accepted that the fig tree was domesticated in the Near East some 6500 years ago," says Bar-Yosef's team.
"Here we report the discovery of nine carbonised fig fruits ... stored in Gilgal I, an early Neolithic village, located in the Lower Jordan Valley, which dates to 11,400 to 11,200 years ago." 
A special type of fig
The figs are a variety that produces a large, sweet fruit, as opposed to the wild type, the researchers say. 
In this variety, known as parthenocarpic figs, the fruit develops without insect pollination and is prevented from falling off the tree, which allows it to become soft, sweet and edible. 
But because such figs do not produce seeds, they cannot reproduce unless people propagate them, perhaps by planting shoots or branches.
"Dried figs similar in size and structure imported from Iran are found today in the markets of London," the scientists say. 
Dried figs
The carbonised figs were not distorted, which, the researchers say, suggests they may have been dried for human consumption.
"Once the parthenocarpic mutation occurred, humans must have recognised that the resulting fruits do not produce new trees, and fig tree cultivation became a common practice," Bar-Yosef says. 
"In this intentional act of planting a specific variant of fig tree, we can see the beginnings of agriculture. This edible fig would not have survived if not for human intervention." 
At the same site researchers found foods that must have been gathered, such as acorns and wild oats.

The Milky Way has asymmetrical spiral arms, some longer than others
Our galaxy is a much wilder looking tentacled beast than suspected, say astronomers who have used a new technique to map the Milky Way.
Radio astronomers used data from a painstaking galaxy-wide survey of hydrogen gas clouds throughout the Milky Way.
They found that instead of being a clean, symmetrical spiral, our home galaxy has extra long arms sprouting out on one side and is warped and armless on the other.
The odd layout could be the result of colossal cannibalistic galactic collisions or intergalactic 'tides', say the researchers online on the journal Science. 
Astronomer Professor Leo Blitz of the University of California at Berkeley says the most surprising thing about the spiral arms on our half of the Milky Way "is that we could see spiral structure all the way to the edge of the [galactic] disc".
The long, elegant, spiral arms are visible, despite a galaxy full of dust, because hydrogen gas emits radio waves that penetrate the dust.
The distances to the various arms could be worked out by the Doppler shift in their radio waves. This is similar, in principle, to how the tone of a train's horn sounds higher-pitched when it's approaching than when it's receding.
Far side of the Milky Way
In contrast to the near side of the Milky Way, the far side appears less orderly. Instead of having clearly defined curved arms there's a messy bulging area, explains co-author Evan Levine.
"It's bent like a vinyl record in the Sun," Levine says. "That would show up in a map like this." As for what causes the weird warping, it could be the result of galactic collisions.
"This lack of symmetry often occurs as galaxies eat little galaxies," Blitz says.
Another possibility is that the bulge is caused by the gravitational tug of the Milky Way's small satellite galaxies.
Visible from the southern hemisphere
The most obvious of these satellite galaxies are the Magellanic Clouds, which are visible to the naked eye from Earth's southern hemisphere.
"The Magellanic Clouds are very prominent, like the tides of the Earth," says astrophysicist Professor Frank Shu of the University of California at San Diego.
Earth's oceans bulge with tides because of the external gravitational tug of the Moon. Likewise, the Magellanic Clouds may cause the bulge in the far side of the Milky Way, he explains.
More details about the Milky Way's structure are likely to be forthcoming, says Levine.
Blind spots
Their new map has a few blind spots caused by the motion of our own solar system inside the Milky Way.
These blind spots show up on their map as an empty circle at the centre of the galaxy and as two blank wedges on opposite sides of our solar system.
It's possible that more advanced analyses of the data will glean meaningful information from the hydrogen emissions of those areas as well, says Levine.
For his part, Blitz is pleased to be able to see so much of the galaxy after many years of trying. He recalls that in 1982 he published another paper in Science describing only a part of a single spiral arm.
"It's like trying to figure out the shape of a forest when you're sitting in the middle of it," says Blitz.

The number 666 is associated with Satan and may people believe it is a bad omen
Today is the sixth day of the sixth month of the year 2006. Boil it down and you've got 666, the number of the beast according to the Bible's book of Revelation, which prophecies the end of the world.
But if the date is enough to send you scurrying under your bedcovers, you may be a victim of what an Australian expert describes as a cognitive virus.
Professor John Bigelow, an expert in superstition and pseudoscience from Melbourne's Monash University, says the number traditionally has a dark significance for occultists, alchemists, heretics and people of a superstitious bent.
"They're a bit like a cognitive virus," he says of superstitions.
"Like computer viruses, they get into people's brains, they cause people to pass them onto someone else ... and the person who hears them finds it difficult to get them out of their mind.
"But I think it's better not to suppress them. [Superstitions] are like the flu, they need to be managed."
The mythology of 666 goes back to chapter 13 in Revelation, the apocalyptic final book of the New Testament, which states "Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast ... his number is six hundred threescore and six".
Bigelow says much of the imagery in Revelation has a schizophrenic quality and is often invoked by people with schizophrenia.
But he says it's impossible to say whether the author, John of Patmos, or St John the Apostle, suffered from schizophrenia or delusional thinking.
Macquarie University's Professor Max Coltheart, an Australian cognitive neuropsychologist, says being superstitious about 666 doesn't necessarily add up to a delusion.
"If you believe something that people around you don't believe in, and there's no evidence for it, that's a good working definition of delusion," he says.
"If it's in the Bible someone might call that evidence."
Associate professor of anthropology Phillips Stevens of the University at Buffalo in New York, says fears of 666 are actually based on a misinterpretation of the Bible.
He says the beast referred to in chapter 13 isn't Satan but several entities.
"Biblical scholars have pointed out there are several beasts in chapter 13 and elsewhere, and they all refer variously to Rome, Roman emperors  and Roman cults of God and emperor worship," he says.
"John of Patmos ... was writing to other persecuted Christians in code."
Perfect numbers
Six also has significance because it is the first perfect number, says Bigelow.
Perfect numbers, which are rare, are the sum of their factors, for example, 6 = 1 + 2 + 3 and it can be divided by one, two and three.
The next perfect numbers are 28 (1 + 2 + 4 + 7 + 14), 496 and 8128.
The 666 combination also occurred in 1666, the year of the Great Fire of London.
However, this also marked the year in which Sir Isaac Newton published his Law of Gravity, leading it to be dubbed the Annus mirabilis.
Conjuring up thoughts of doom, Satan and rampaging evil in relation to a number is an example of magical thinking, Stevens says, where things associated with good things bring food fortune and things associated with disastrous events bring negative consequences.
But Bigelow says magical thought can have benefits that science doesn't.
"Science is not tapping into our emotional nature whereas superstitions are a reflection of something about us," he says.
"It may be a mistake to think you can control the world by projecting your own associations onto it, to turn it into science, but it's not a mistake to register that we do have these deep correspondences among our ideas."

Keeping cut fruit chilled is the key to keeping vitamin C levels high, food scientists show
Health conscious but time poor? Grab a pack of packaged ready-to-eat fruit and your body will be none the wiser.
That's the message from new international research showing that chilled, ready-to-eat, fresh-cut fruit retains high levels of vitamin C and other antioxidants.
Cutting and packaging fruit has almost no effect on the main antioxidants, scientists report in the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry.
In fact, levels of some antioxidants increased in selected fruits.
Researchers including those from the University of California, Davis, took pineapples, watermelon, rockmelon, strawberries, mangoes and kiwifruits and processed half as fresh-cut and left half whole.
Both lots of fruit were refrigerated under identical conditions for nine days before being tested for nutrient content. 
Tests revealed only small losses of antioxidant compounds in the cut fruit compared to fruit left whole.
For example, losses in vitamin C after six days at 5&deg;C were less than 5% in mango, strawberry and watermelon pieces, 10% in pineapple pieces, 12% in kiwifruit and 25% in rockmelon cubes.
No losses in carotenoids, free radical scavengers that are thought to enhance the immune system, were found in kiwifruit slices and watermelon. Losses in other fruits ranged from 10-15% in rockmelon, mango and strawberry to 25% in pineapple.
Interestingly, total carotenoid content increased in mango and watermelon cubes in response to light exposure.
The findings don't surprise Australian food technologist Keith Richardson, who says cold is generally the key to keeping nutritional content.
"The fruits and vegetables are chilled prior to cutting and they don't gain a lot of temperature during the processing operation. Then they're promptly returned to below 5% before being sent out [in refrigerated trucks to sit in refrigerated supermarket cabinets]," he says.
Richardson, a food technology liaison officer with Food Science Australia, says provided the cold chain is kept "you wouldn't expect a significant loss of nutrients".
"Generally speaking, the colder you keep fruit the slower its metabolism, including any breakdown of nutrients."
Meanwhile, the research team says further studies are now needed to evaluate the effect of treatments on the nutrient retention of fresh-cut fruits.
This include treatments like modified atmosphere packaging and chemical dips for delaying softening and browning.

Researchers say that rock formations in the Pilbara represent a diverse fossil ecosystem, but not everyone agrees
Researchers say they have found "compelling" new evidence of the earliest known forms of life on Earth in ancient rock in Australia.
Australian and Canadian scientists say they have found new varieties of stromatolites, rock formations left 3.43 billion years ago in the Pilbara region of Western Australia.
If the researchers are right, and the stromatolites represent the fossilised remains of early microbes, this could cause scientists to revise estimates of when life began on Earth; some estimates are as recent as 1.9 billion years ago. 
The paper, published today in the journal Nature, also fuels an ongoing controversy about whether the formations were made by living things or chemical processes.
Lead author, PhD student Abigail Allwood from Sydney's Macquarie University, says the scientists found a stromatolite reef formed by microbial organisms.
The reef, along a 10 kilometre part of the Pilbara known as Strelley Pool Chert (STC), contains new types of stromatolites, some looking like upside down icecream cones, others like egg cartons. 
"The astonishing thing is [the reef's] age, which is a time in Earth's history when the very existence of life is uncertain," she says.
"We're seeing evidence not just of life's existence but that it was probably well established and already biodiverse, which suggests it could have emerged much earlier in Earth's history."
But detractors say they're not convinced.
Martin Brasier, professor of palaeobiology at the University of Oxford, has long argued against the biogenesis theory of the STC stromatolites. And he isn't convinced by today's paper.
"Much caution is needed when making claims about the earliest signs of life," he says.
"In rocks of this great age we must assume the hypothesis of a non-biological origin."
Seven new types
The STC stromatolites were first discovered more than 20 years ago when they were declared to most likely be of biological origin.
Subsequent papers argued various alternative theories, including that they were formed by hydrothermal deposits that produced a mineral crust with structures mimicking stromatolites.
Today Allwood reports she has found seven different types of stromatolite, potentially reflecting at least seven different types of organism.
"Stromatolites in the modern environment [are] associated with a whole community of organisms, so potentially we're talking about much more diversity than just seven types of organisms," she says.
But Brasier argues that Allwood and her team have demonstrated the "exact opposite" of biogenesis.
He says if the structures had been made by living things they would have produced uniform, rather than varied, shapes.
The wide range of stromatolites reported in Nature indicates they are actually "self-organising structures of largely physico-chemical origin", he says, like sand dunes or crystal formations.
Similar structures have been produced in the laboratory without microbes, he says.
A window on the evolution of life
Allwood says her research sheds new light not only on when, but how, life began.
She says the first stromatolites appeared as soon as the "carbonate platform" containing formations became submerged by rising sea levels.
"It's like the organisms were literally waiting in the wings for the right conditions to emerge and they just pounced and spread rapidly everywhere," she says.
She says her results also contradict theories that early life emerged and flourished in extreme conditions.
"What we've found is that the hydrothermal activity occurs immediately stratigraphically below and above the STC," she says.
"The rise of the stromatolites occurs as the hydrothermal activity goes away and the fall of the stromatolites occurs when the hydrothermal activity comes back.
"This certainly supports the notion  ...  of life getting a firm foothold and flourishing [in association] with something quite normal."
She says apart from the determination of the antiquity of life on Earth being "an end in itself", her research will help the search for signs of life on other planets, including Mars.
"These sorts of studies are crucial for informing techniques and approaches for detecting biosignatures on Mars and how we'll distinguish them when we get there," she says.

Planemos, short for planetary mass objects, are a cross between a star and a planet. Astronomers compare them with a brown dwarf, seen here surrounded by a swirling mass of planet-forming dust and gas
Too lightweight to be stars but bigger than most planets, a handful of hot young free-floating objects have the raw materials to make their own mini-planetary systems, astronomers say.
These so-called planemos have discs of cosmic dust and gas circling them, just like some young stars.
These kinds of discs contain the ingredients for planets; astronomers believe Earth and the other planets in our solar system were forged from such a disc. 
But planemos, short for planetary mass objects, are unlike normal planets because they do not orbit stars, says Associate Professor Ray Jayawardhana of the University of Toronto.
He and other researchers present their findings at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Calgary, Canada.
"These things are not orbiting a star. They're by themselves," Jayawardhana says.
The researchers detected four newborn planemos, just a few million years old, in a star-forming region about 450 light-years from Earth, a relative stone's throw in cosmic terms.
A light-year is about 10 trillion kilometres, the distance light travels in a year. 
All four of these objects had dust discs around them, the astronomers report. 
Scientists also found a disc-skirted planemo interacting with a brown dwarf, a failed star, even closer to Earth, just 170 light-years away. 
Such a planet-sized object might have been expected to be pulled into orbit around the brown dwarf, but instead the two revolve around each other, and both have the makings for more satellites. 
An eternal freeze
These objects, with several times the mass of the giant planet Jupiter but 100 times less massive than our Sun, are cosmic infants only a few million years old.
Even Jupiter had a disc when it was young, and its dozens of moons were formed from the dust and gas it contained.
But Earth's rocky moon was probably born when our world collided with another heavenly body early on, and Mars' moons were asteroids captured by the planet's gravity. 
Planemos are a relatively new player on the cosmic scene, filling the gap between the least massive stars and the most massive planets, Jayawardhana says. 
"These are the lowest-mass brown dwarfs or really big giant planets, especially when they're young," he says. 
When young, planemos are still warmed by the heat of formation and are more like stars, he says. But as they age, these planet-esque objects shrink and cool. 
Other researchers do not use the term 'planet' to describe any satellites that might be formed around a planemo, referring to these as moons or moonlets. 
If such bodies do form, they would be inhospitable to Earth-type life. If a satellite formed very close to a young planemo, it might be temporarily warm enough for liquid water to exist.
But Jayawardhana acknowledges that in the long run, life would have dim prospects.
"Any kind of planet that forms around them is committed to an eternal freeze," he says.

Australian soccer fans might not be disappointed, according to statistical analysis of the Socceroos' chances in the World Cup
Australia has roughly the same chance of winning the World Cup as you have tossing three sixes with three dice, says a sports statistician.
Professor Stephen Clarke, a researcher at Swinburne University says Australia has a 180 to one, or 0.6%, chance of winning the final.
"This is not bad and nowhere near as small as the chance of being killed in a terrorist attack or winning [the lottery]," he says.
"It's slightly more than flipping eight heads in a row (1 in 256) or tossing three sixes with three dice (1 in 216)."
While Australia goes into the World Cup as an underdog, Clarke says, statistically speaking, the nature of soccer gives the weaker side a chance.
He says, if one team is expected to kick two goals in a match and another is expected  to only kick one, the stronger side still only has a 61% chance of winning, with a 21% chance of a draw. The weaker team has an 18% chance of winning.
Function of rare events
"Soccer is very variable," he says.
"In Australian Rules football, suppose one team kicks on average a goal every 10 minutes and the other team kicks on average a goal every five minutes. The chances the weaker team will kick more goals than the other team is quite small.
"But in soccer it doesn't work that way because goals are much rarer, it's a function of rare events," he says.
Australia has a 32% chance of making it through to the second round.
Predictions on various teams' chances at making various stages of the World Cup are posted on the Swinburne sports statistics website.
They were formulated by Andrew Patterson, a former honours student turned professional punter and consultant number cruncher.
At the latest analysis the figures showed perennial favourite Brazil has a 29% chance of winning, followed by England with a 10% chance.
According to Patterson's analysis, Australia the same chance of winning as the Ivory Coast, and Serbia and Montenegro.
Trinidad and Tobago is ranked at the bottom of the ladder with a demoralising 0% chance of winning the World Cup.
Factoring in public opinion
Patterson worked out the statistics using odds from an international online betting exchange and ran them through a computer model taking into account the structural peculiarities of the World Cup competition and other factors.
"I've taken a combination of the public's opinion as well as past data and my own statistical expertise to come up with a statistical model that predicts a team's chances," he says.
His model will update predicted outcomes as the tournament progresses.
Patterson says his analysis also puts Australia as favourite to win its opener against Japan on 12 June.
"I put the two sides into the computer and based on how they currently stand ... There's a 55% chance Australia will win and a 45% chance that Japan will win," he says.
"When we factor a draw in we come up with 38%  Australia, 31% Japan, 31% the draw. It's pretty much a hedged result."
The World Cup kicks off on 9 June.

Patients who take an active role in managing their own health may still need help in the decision-making process, researchers say
When faced with a tough medical decision, imagine that you're making it for a friend rather than for yourself, a new study suggests. 
That may make such choices easier, report scientists in the June issue of the Journal of General Internal Medicine.
"We think that it's understandably easy to get caught up in the difficulty of the moment - a patient has just been diagnosed with a problem, they're facing a complex treatment decision; it's hard to see the big picture," says Dr Brian Zikmund-Fisher of the University of Michigan.
"It's actually relatively easy for people to gain a different type of perspective by thinking about what they would do if they were recommending for someone else." 
Zikmund-Fisher and his team looked at a phenomenon known as omission bias.
This is when a person faced with a medical decision may choose passive nonintervention rather than an active approach due to fear of causing harm to themselves. 
The researchers asked 2399 people to imagine themselves as a patient, a doctor treating a patient, a medical director creating patient guidelines, or a parent making a decision for a child. 
The people in the study were then asked to make medical choices in two different scenarios. 
In one, there is a deadly flu circulating that will kill 10% of people who aren't vaccinated, although the vaccine itself carries a 5% risk of causing death.
In the second, participants were asked to decide on whether or not to treat a slow-growing cancer with chemotherapy. 
Changing hats
Study participants were more likely to choose the active approach when making a decision as a professional, rather than for themselves.
Some 73% of those imagining themselves as doctors would opt for the vaccine, compared to 63% of those posing as medical directors and 48% making the decision for themselves.
A total of 68% of those taking the physician or medical director role opted for chemotherapy, compared to 60% of those in the patient role. 
Thinking as parents, 57% of study participants would choose the vaccine for their child, and 72% would opt for chemotherapy. 
This suggests, Zikmund-Fisher says, that if a child is already sick a parent may feel more comfortable choosing active treatment than when making the decision to choose preventive but potentially risky treatment for a healthy child. 
Advice from doctors?
Doctors are increasingly allowing patients to be a part of the decision-making process, Zikmund-Fisher notes. But the findings suggest they shouldn't opt out of advising patients entirely.
"The physician might be able to act as a coach to help guide the decision making process," he says.
Doctors could propose that patients try to think of themselves as making the decision for a friend, he explains. 
"Helping the patient to take a step back might make for a better decision-making process all around."

Feeling itchy?
Genes and gender help determine an individual's urge to scratch an itch, suggests a new study.
The study on pruritus, otherwise known as itch, is the first to demonstrate sex differences in itch-induced scratching behaviour in animals.
The researchers studied mice, but they say the findings could apply to humans and other mammals.
The conclusion? Females scratched themselves 23% more often than males did.
"We haven't investigated the underlying mechanisms of the sex difference yet, but they usually involve gonadal [reproductive gland] hormones, such as oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone, either during development or in adulthood," says Professor Jeffrey Mogil, one of the researchers.
Mogil, a specialist in the genetics of pain at McGill University in Canada, and his colleagues induced itching in the mice by administering chloroquine, a malaria drug that causes itchiness.
The researchers also used histamines, compounds produced by mammalian tissues to dilate small blood vessels. Histamines are largely responsible for the itchiness associated with allergies, hence the relief provided by antihistamines.
The team's findings are published online in the journal Pain.
Mogil says itch is one of the most common reasons people seek medical care.
He explains that pruritus is an important symptom of many skin, systemic and autoimmune diseases. 
Numerous medications, such as the malaria drug administered to the mice, cause itching as a troubling side effect. Itching can also be a chronic condition in its own right.
Are you in pain?
The most common reason people seek medical attention, of course, is pain.
Interestingly enough, Mogil and his team found that individuals sensitive to pain are more resistant to itch, while those with less pain sensitivity have a greater tendency to scratch.
"I think pain and itch are wired up in the brain as opposites, in a sense, such that inheriting particular forms of pain/itch-relevant genes would simultaneously make you more sensitive to pain and less sensitive to itch, or vice versa," he speculates.
The researchers pointed out that scratching to the point of pain is a well-known strategy for alleviating itch. Conversely, pain medications and local anesthesia often intensify histamine-induced itching.
Women feel the pain
The pain-itch correlation, however, is complicated by findings from another study last year in the journal Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, which found that women feel pain more intensely than men do.
Dr Bradon Wilhelmi, a plastic surgeon who authored the paper, discovered that women have, on average, 34 nerve fibres per square centimetre of facial skin while men only possess around 17 nerve fibres over the same area.
"Because women have more nerve receptors, they may experience pain more powerfully than men, requiring different surgical techniques, treatments or medicine dosages to help manage their pain and make them feel comfortable," Wilhelmi says.
It could be that women are more sensitive than men to both pain and itch, or that women have evolved some level of pain tolerance, perhaps due to giving birth.
Mogil hopes future research will show which genes turn the urge to itch up or down, how the proteins made by those genes work, and how the same genes may be linked to pain sensitivity.

Isisfordia was a small crocodile - only a metre long, weighing around 3 or 4 kilograms
A new fossil from the Age of the Dinosaurs suggests modern crocodiles first evolved in Gondwana, says an international team of palaeontologists.
The team reports on the fossilised remains of the most primitive ancestor of modern crocodiles, discovered near an outback Australian town in Queensland, in the Royal Society journal  Proceedings B today.
"Up until now, the kinds of creatures that seemed to be the ancestors, or close to the ancestors, of all modern crocodiles have come from places like Belgium, from England, from the USA," says team member Dr Paul Willis.
"So that's where we thought the group originated."
But he says the new specimen, Isisfordia duncani, shares more features in common with modern crocodiles than any specimens found in the northern hemisphere.
"It really defines that branch of crocodile evolution more clearly than anything else we've come across to date," says Willis, an honorary research associate at Sydney's University of New South Wales.
The researchers say that, at 98 to 95 million years old, Isisfordia predates modern crocodiles by about 20 million years.
"Ours is the grand-daddy of crocodiles," says Willis.
Ball and socket joints 
Modern crocodiles are defined by having ball and socket joints between their vertebrae. And Willis says this gives them a very flexible yet strong backbone.
"Crocodiles have incredible bursts of very violent energy and so you need a strong backbone to be able to withstand that," he says.
Modern crocodiles also have a hard palate that reaches right to the back of the mouth, which means they can breathe at the same time as eating something under water, says Willis.
The palate also strengthens the snout, bracing it and distributing forces when the crocodile bites something.
"Crocodile bites are second only to Tyrannosaurus as the most powerful known bites of all time," says Willis.
Willis says all these features would have given Isisfordia and its descendants greater evolutionary advantage than its predecessors in aquatic environments.
Complete skeleton
Willis and colleagues analysed two fossilised skeletons first discovered in the mid-1990s in a creek bed in Isisford, in central-western Queensland, by former deputy mayor of the town, Ian Duncan.
One specimen is almost a complete skeleton with just the snout and face of the crocodile missing. The other is a complete skull.
"Between the two we have a complete skeleton," says Willis. "We know what the whole animal looked like and it's very rare to get that."
The researchers know the two are from the same species because they have the back of the skull of both.
A small croc
Isisfordia was a small crocodile, only a metre long, weighing around 3 or 4 kilograms, says Willis.
He says it was the only known crocodile in Australia at that time and wouldn't have had much competition.
Willis says it would have lived in a swampy river delta that opened into a large inland sea and survived on eating, among other things, fish and other small vertebrates, insects and crustaceans.
Isisfordia would have been the most immediate ancestor of all modern crocodilians, says Willis.
This includes crocodiles, alligators and creatures such as gharials (long thin-snouted crocodiles that live in the Ganges River) and caimans (close relatives of alligators from South America).
Gondwana overlooked
Willis says this is not the first time that Gondwana has been overlooked as a site of evolution.
"The fossil record is loaded to the northern hemisphere because there are more sites and more people looking for fossils," he says.
"But as we're finding more fossils in the Gondwanan continents it appears that a lot of groups that we previously thought originated in the northern hemisphere - or in Laurasia - actually have older representatives here in the southern continents, and in this case in Australia."
Willis is a reporter on ABC TV's Catalyst program.

Female black swans slip away from their protective partners for illicit encounters, new research shows
Swans have long been viewed as a symbol of fidelity and everlasting love. But they are in fact cheating philanderers that regularly flee the nest for extramarital sex, Australian researchers reveal.
DNA testing has shown that one in six cygnets is the product of an illicit encounter, smashing the birds' monogamous image. 
Now researchers at the University of Melbourne's zoology department are trying to establish how the females manage to slip away from their partners, who are renowned for being protective, to mate on the side. 
"Swans have long been renowned as symbols of lifelong fidelity and devotion, but our recent work has shown that infidelity is rife among black swans," says Dr Raoul Mulder, whose team is busy fitting tracking devices to scores of swans. 
Mulder says DNA paternity testing points to extramarital activity among swans but it remains unclear how the illicit encounters take place. 
In an effort to learn more, up to 60 male swans at Melbourne's Albert Park Lake are being fitted with a tiny microchip attached to their tail feathers. 
The females, in turn, are being fitted with a miniature tracking device, known as a decoder. 
"When a male and female copulate, the female's decoder unit detects the microchip implanted in the male's tail feathers, registering the male's identity, as well as the time of copulation," Mulder says. 
"All mating events are logged onto the decoder unit, so that a complete record of her mating behaviour over several weeks can be downloaded when the swan is recaptured." 
Mulder says the study targets black swans because they are large enough to wear the tracking device and are more common than their introduced white cousins. 
As well as providing a snapshot of the sexual activity of swans, the research could reveal extremely sophisticated mating choices by the female birds, Mulder says. 
"There are risks associated with mating with other birds so there must be some evolutionary benefits," he says.
The study could point to ways in which females try to ensure the fitness of their offspring by seeking out the superior genes of another mating partner, he adds. 
The three-year, A$200,000 (US$149,000) study is funded by a grant from the Australian Research Council.

The Crab Nebula with a central pulsar surrounded by rings of high-energy particles
An astrophysicist who helped first identify pulsars and mentored many of Australia's radio astronomers has been honoured in the Queen's Birthday Honours List.
Professor Phillip (Pip) Hamilton, deputy vice-chancellor (research) at Deakin University, will today be honoured for his contribution to radioastronomy and tertiary education.
Pulsars are collapsed stars that can emit regular pulses of radio waves several times a second and were discovered just as Hamilton was completing his PhD in 1969.
He says at the time, pulsars were dubbed 'LGM 1'.
"LGM stands for 'little green men' because [the pulsing signal] looked like something that was very, very regular," he says. 
"It had to be artificial, didn't it, because no one had ever seen these things before."
But after four or five pulsars had been found, Hamilton says the 'little green men' theory didn't hold up anymore. And today there are about five or six hundred known pulsars.
Hamilton spent 20 years studying pulsars and recalls one occasion where he was involved with a team using the Parkes telescope to take a second look at a suspicious sighting made by another telescope.
"We actually discovered this pulsar, a very interesting object, in the middle of a thunderstorm," he says.
"That's very exciting stuff."
Hamilton describes himself as "half engineer" and has had major involvement in designing several telescope control systems including that at Parkes and the radio telescopes of the University of Tasmania.
"I'm a hands-on person. If something breaks down in the office I'm there before anybody else with a screwdriver in the hand," he says.

Debris disc around Beta Pictoris showing light reflected by dust around the young star
Astronomers have discovered a solar system that seems like an early version of our own, the US space agency says.
It has huge quantities of carbon gas mixed with a cloud of dust surrounding a young, yellow star called Beta Pictoris.
The star and its emerging solar system, in which planets could already be forming, is less than 20 million years old, say the researchers.
The abundance of carbon gas in the dust disc surrounding the star means that the planets being formed could be rich in graphite and methane much like those of our solar system in the early stages, they say. 
The astronomers, led by Dr Aki Roberge, of NASA's Goddard Flight Center, is published in the journal Nature.
"There is much, much more carbon gas than anyone expected," Roberge says.
"Could this be what our own solar system looked like when it was young? Are we seeing the formation of new types of worlds? Either prospect is fascinating." 
The astronomers made their observations using the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer satellite launched in 1999. 
Beta Pictoris
First discovered in 1984, Beta Pictoris is located in our galaxy, is 60 light-years from Earth and has been measured at 1.8 times the Sun's mass. 
Images of Beta Pictoris taken by the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope show it could have a Jupiter-type planet already and possibly also rocky planets in the course of formation, astronomers say.

Restricting an infant's diet without a clinical diagnosis of food allergy could place him or her at risk, researchers say
Parents are more likely to think their infant is allergic to certain foods than is actually the case, according to a new UK study. 
Dr Taraneh Dean of the University of Portsmouth and her colleagues found that more than half (54%) of a group of one-year-olds were avoiding some foods because their parents perceived them to have had reactions to items such as cow's milk, wheat, eggs or additives. 
But overall only 2-6% of the infants had clinically confirmed food hypersensitivity, the researchers report in the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. 
Dean and her team surveyed a group of 969 parents when their infants were three, six, nine and 12 months of age.
At one year, the infants underwent skin prick testing to investigate their sensitivity to a number of allergens. 
During the course of the study, infants whose parents reported symptoms of food hypersensitivity had a test known as an open food challenge. 
If these challenges suggested food hypersensitivity, the children then underwent double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenges, which are considered the 'gold standard' in diagnosing food hypersensitivity. 
At three months of age, according to parental reports, 14% of infants had adverse reactions to food, while 7% did by one year of age. 
Among all the children, almost 26% had been reported at some point by their parents to have food hypersensitivity. 
But open food challenges identified food hypersensitivity in just 14%, and double-blind, placebo controlled testing confirmed it in 6%. 
Skin prick testing found just 2% of the children had sensitivity to milk, egg, fish, peanut, sesame or wheat. 
"[The findings] emphasise the need for accurate diagnosis to prevent infants being on unnecessarily restricted diets, which may be associated with inadequate nutrition in this important period of growth and development," the researchers conclude.

A new sensor made of nanomaterials could give robots a sense of touch like we have with our fingers
A new type of sensor may one day give robots the power to "feel" surfaces and perform delicate operations in the same way that human hands do today, say US researchers.
Vivek Maheshwari and Professor Ravi Saraf, of the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln, report on the new device in today's issue of the journal Science.
They say their sensor could give a robot tactile sensitivity comparable to that of human fingers.
Robots equipped with such sensors could be used in minimally invasive surgery, where tiny incisions and tiny tools are used to target very specific areas in the body.
The new sensor is an electroluminescent film that glows in response to pressure and texture.
When an object is pressed into the film, the light from the film is captured by a specialised camera and translated into a picture. 
Sensor feels out a coin
To illustrate the power of their new sensor, Maheshwari and Saraf pressed coins against the device. 
A US penny produced an image detailed enough to show the wrinkles in the clothing of Abraham Lincoln, who is pictured on the coin, and the letters "TY" in "LIBERTY".
A robot's "hands" could be coated with the sensor film and the signals received could be used to guide the robot in performing surgery, say the researchers, in the same way that surgeons now use their sense of touch to find tumors or gallstones. 
"Moreover, there is great interest in developing humanoid robots that can sense shapes, textures, and hardness and manipulate complex objects, which are not readily possible by vision alone," say Maheshwari and Saraf.
Their new film is made of alternating layers of gold and semiconducting cadmium-sulfur nanoparticles separated by nonconducting, or dielectric, films. 
