
The mass extinction known as the Great Dying 250 million years ago had profound and lasting effects on marine life. The upper part of the image represents life before the mass extinction, the lower part afterwards
About 95% of the Earth's marine species and 70% of its land species were wiped out during a mass extinction about 250 million years ago, according to Australian and US researchers.
This event, which occurred at the end of the Permian age and is known as the Great Dying, fundamentally changed which species survived in the world's oceans.
And scientists at James Cook University in Townsville, Queensland and the Field Museum in Chicago warn that modern human-induced changes to the ecosystem could have a similar impact. 
The researchers report in today's issue of the journal Science how they came across the culling of species while examining figures on the numbers of marine life forms in communities over the past 540 million years. 
Simple species that did not move or search for food were largely wiped out, they conclude.
More complex life forms such as crabs and snails that went looking for food took over. 
The biological devastation occurred when the Earth was believed to have had only one continent, surrounded by a single ocean.
The researchers did not go into what caused the mass extinction.
But using a new palaeobiology database, they gave what they say are the most exhaustive details ever assembled of its effect. 
'Ecologically simple' species such as stationary shells and other forms that filtered food out of the water were replaced by complex communities, mobile species such as crabs and clams.
"We think these are the first analyses of this type at this large scale," says Dr Peter Wagner, associate curator of fossil invertebrates at the Field Museum and lead author of the study, who worked with Dr Matthew Kosnik of James Cook University. 
"They show that the end-Permian mass extinction permanently altered not just taxonomic diversity but also the prevailing marine ecosystem structure," Wagner says.
The results of the study could provide a warning on how we treat the ecosystem now, the experts say.
"Studies by modern marine ecologists suggest that humans are reducing certain marine ecosystems to something reminiscent of 550 million years ago, prior to the explosion of animal diversity," Wagner says.
"The asteroid that wiped out the dinosaurs couldn't manage that."

A fraction of the amber collected so far from the beaches of northern Australia
Huge chunks of amber containing the remnants of ancient rainforests have been found along beaches in Far North Queensland, the first amber fossils to be found in Australia.
The amber pieces, some as big as a football, contain flies, beetles, spiders, flowers, fungi, moss, fern spores and pollen as well as bubbles of gas and water from the time, the researchers say.
The fossils are at least 4 million years old, they say, possibly much older.
Fisherman Dale Wicks and partner Beth Norris discovered the amber while taking evening walks along the beach on the Cape York Peninsula, says University of New South Wales palaeontologist Henk Godthelp.
"It turns out that it was the very first discovery of true amber in Australia," says Godthelp, who was invited to analyse the fossils and reported the find at the Riversleigh Society meeting in Sydney this week.
While amber-like substances such as copal and coal resin are found in Australia, no-one had found true amber, he says.
Godthelp, who studies the evolution of rainforests, says the fossilised resin is most likely from kauri pine, which grows in rainforests. 
He says amber is very good at preserving living creatures trapped inside it because it stops the air from getting to them and also contains chemicals that act as preservatives.
Anything trapped inside it, he says, will give a unique picture of ancient rainforests.
This includes insects, which come from the rainforest canopy, and bubbles of water or gas, which he says could provide clues about past climates.
Nearly one in five of the amber pieces found contain fossils or bubbles of water or gas, says Godthelp.
"By world standards, that's remarkably high."
How old?
Godthelp says he doesn't know how old the amber is yet but it would be at least 4 million years old, possibly much older.
"We think it's probably Tertiary," he says.

Polonium interferes with the body's ability to repair itself
Polonium-210, the highly toxic radioactive isotope found in the body of poisoned former Russian spy Alexander Litvinenko is a very rare, exotic material that is difficult to obtain, scientists say.
The UK's Health Protection Agency says Litvinenko, who died last week in a London hospital, had a significant amount of the radioactive isotope in his body.
But how it got there and where it came from is a mystery.
Radiation and chemistry experts say large-scale equipment, such as a nuclear reactor, would be needed to produce sufficient amounts to kill.
"It is not as simple as the idea that somebody might have broken into a radioactivity cabinet at some local hospital and walked off with some polonium," says Dr Andrea Sella, a lecturer in chemistry at University College London.
Although scientists would not speculate on the source of the polonium, Sella says Litvinenko's death is not a random killing.
"This is not a tool chosen by a group of amateurs. These people had some serious resources behind them," he says.
Polonium is a by-product of uranium that was discovered by Polish chemist Marie Curie in the late 19th century.
It's a rare but naturally occurring metalloid found in the soil and atmosphere, and even in the human body.
But at high doses it is highly toxic if ingested or inhaled; it emits alpha particles that can damage the body's tissues and organs.
"[Alpha particles] are unable to penetrate a sheet of paper and so it is not a hazard unless ingested," says Professor William Gelletly of the University of Surrey.
Long-term exposure to radiation can cause mutations and cancer. But exposure to a short, intense burst of radiation causes major damage to key control centres in cells.
"An alpha particle strikes a strand of DNA. It snips it in two, which is bad news, or glues two strands together. Either way normal cell repair mechanisms may be unable to sort that out," says Sella.
"The result is that essentially the cellular command and control network [in the body] falls apart. That is what radiation sickness is all about."
Professor David Ray, of the University of Nottingham, says even if a high dose of radiation could not be detected externally after Litvinenko was admitted to hospital a fatal dose could have concentrated in deep tissues such as bone marrow.
"The limited information that has been released about Mr Litvinenko's condition and the timing of his death is consistent with either radiation poisoning or chemicals that stop cell division," he says.
Polonium-210 also has a very short half-life of 138 days, at which point it loses half of its radioactivity.
"That is long enough so you can handle it and deliver it to your target and it will pack a punch," Sella says.
Polonium-210 is used in research and medicine, as well as a heating source for space components.
But in those forms it is not conducive to easy poisoning, scientists say.

Compounds isolated from mangoes could be used to treat metabolic disorders, early research suggests
A mango a day may one day protect against diabetes and high cholesterol, a preliminary study suggests.
The study is analysing how individual components of the luscious summer favourite affect human cells.
And early results, presented at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne this week, suggest that some mango components act on the same pathways that diabetes and cholesterol drugs target.
University of Queensland PhD student Ashley Wilkinson says the study, the first of its kind, aims to find unique ingredients in mangoes and other tropical fruit like paw paws.
"There's been a lot of research looking at nutritional bioactives but it's focused on more temperate fruit and vegetables like broccoli and grapes. And there hasn't been any research looking at tropical fruit in the context of looking at modulating cellular processes," she says.
Dr Sarah Roberts-Thomson of the university's school of pharmacy, who is supervising the work, says early results suggest some compounds in mangoes work by activating or inhibiting groups of receptors known as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors, or PPARs.
"We don't know yet how the whole thing's going to play out but we know some of the individual components activate these receptors or even inhibit them," she says.
"That could end up with positive nutritional health benefits for diabetes and high cholesterol."
PPARs are also increasingly being linked to colon and breast cancer, and the study will investigate whether compounds in mangoes can also kill cancerous cells. 
One of the compounds the researchers are focusing on is quercetin, a chemical also found in onions.
Another is norathyriol, a by-product of mangiferin, which is found in a range of fruits and traditional antidiabetic herbs.
Gut bacteria convert mangiferin into norathyriol, Wilkinson says. Once converted, it appears to have an even more potent affect on PPARs.
Preliminary findings also suggest that mango skin, often a component of mango juice, is particularly rich in these compounds, Roberts-Thomson says.
A long way down the track these compounds could be isolated to form alternative treatments for metabolic disorders like diabetes and high cholesterol, she says.
The study is being conducted with the Queensland Department of Primary Industries.

The real-life study found clubbers were using much higher doses of MDMA than lab studies could ever test
The idea of being followed around a nightclub by a researcher bent on taking a blood sample and measuring your temperature may not be your idea of a good time.
But 'field' studies like this may be the only way to get the full picture of the effects of the drug ecstasy, or MDMA, says University of Adelaide pharmacologist Professor Rod Irvine.
Irvine, whose unique recreation-setting study of ecstasy was presented at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne today, says real-life studies of ecstasy paint a very different picture to conventional, controlled, low-dose laboratory studies.
"I'm not saying that we must go out into clubs and do naturalistic studies and that they're the only things to do, but those sorts of studies must be included in the spectra of what we're doing," he says.
"People out there will use much higher doses of the drugs than would ever be allowed ethically in a controlled clinical setting.
"So it gives you the opportunity ... to perhaps pick up data that you could never replicate in a laboratory."
Taking the lab to the club
Irvine's study, conducted with the PhD student Kate Morefield, analysed 10 people who took ecstasy in a party setting.
The subjects, aged around 27, had taken one to five pills.
Blood samples were collected just before taking the ecstasy and once an hour for the next four hours. Heart rate, temperature and blood pressure was also regularly monitored.
The study showed that using the drug in a recreational setting produced higher elevations in heart rate, blood pressure and skin temperature than previous laboratory studies had shown.
The concentration of MDMA, or methylenedioxymethamphetamine, in clubbers' blood also exceeded those reported in clinical research, Irvine says.
"In recreational settings, individuals experience or tolerate physiological effects of greater magnitude and achieve considerably higher blood concentrations of MDMA ... than those reported in controlled clinical studies," the research, contained in a poster presentation, says.
For more information about ecstasy and other drugs, see the DrugInfo Clearing House website, run by the Australian Drug Foundation.

Humpback whales have surprisingly complex brains, which raises questions about how these cetaceans evolved
Humpback whales have a type of brain cell seen only in humans, the great apes, and other cetaceans such as dolphins, US researchers report.
This might mean such whales are more intelligent than they have been given credit for, the scientists say.
And it suggests the basis for complex brains either evolved more than once, or has gone unused by most animal species.
The finding may help explain some whale behaviours, such as intricate communication skills, the formation of alliances, cooperation, cultural transmission and the use of tools, the researchers report in journal The Anatomical Record. 
Professor Patrick Hof and colleagues from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York discovered a type of cell called a spindle neurone in the cortex of the whale brains.
They found the cells in areas comparable to where they are seen in humans and great apes.
Although the function of spindle neurones is not well understood, they may be involved in cognition - learning, remembering and recognising the world.
Spindle cells may be affected by Alzheimer's disease and other debilitating brain disorders such as autism and schizophrenia. 
Complex social patterns
The researches found spindle neurones in the same location in toothed whales with the largest brains, which the researchers say suggests the cells may be related to brain size.
Toothed whales such as orcas are generally considered more intelligent than baleen whales such as humpbacks and blue whales, which filter water for their food.
The humpbacks also have structures that resemble 'islands' in the cerebral cortex, also seen in some other mammals.
These islands may have evolved to promote fast and efficient communication between neurones, the researchers say. 
Spindle neurones probably first appeared in the common ancestor of hominids, humans and great apes about 15 million years ago, the researchers say. They are not seen in lesser apes or monkeys.
In cetaceans they would have evolved earlier, possibly as early as 30 million years ago, the researchers say. 
How did these cells evolve?
Either the spindle neurones were only kept in the animals with the largest brains or they evolved several times independently, the researchers say. 
"In spite of the relative scarcity of information on many cetacean species, it is important to note in this context that sperm whales, killer whales, and certainly humpback whales, exhibit complex social patterns that included intricate communication skills, coalition-formation, cooperation, cultural transmission and tool usage," the researchers write. 
"It is thus likely that some of these abilities are related to comparable histological complexity in brain organisation in cetaceans and in hominids."

The shapes and colours of this abalone shell are governed by genes that are expressed in precise locations beneath its shell
Scientists have found the genes responsible for the spectacular kaleidoscope of shapes, patterns and colours that are the hallmark of tropical abalone, edible marine snails found in Australia's Great Barrier Reef.
Researchers say the vibrant range of patterns and colours on their shell mirror the expression of specific genes in the mollusc's mantle, the umbrella of skin just below the shell.
The international research team publish its findings in the journal BMC Biology.
All snails have a mantle, which creates their shell. But marine snails don't build their shells from within.
"Instead they release molecules into the sea water and then pull together things like calcium and chalk from the water [to add to the molecules to create their shells]," says Australian co-author Professor Bernie Degnan, from the University of Queensland.
"So the beautiful shells you see are actually the product of taking things out of the sea water."
This combination of secreted molecules and molecules from the sea acts to strengthen the shell.
Mystery molecules
The research team was interested in finding out which molecules the marine snail releases through its mantle.
To do this, they sequenced 530 randomly-selected genes in the mantle tissue of the Haliotis asinina abalone.
They then collaborated with German colleagues from the University of G&ouml;ttingen to analyse how these genes are expressed.
The team identified 331 genes that encode proteins expressed in the mantle, a quarter of which are secreted. 
Each gene is expressed in a specific part of the mantle, with each area responsible for creating a specific shape, pattern or colour on the shell.
"What happens is that the mantle secretes proteins and somehow these proteins interact with the seawater to make the shell," Degnan says.
By comparing the abalone DNA sequences with the genome of a related mollusc, the team showed that the genes encoding the secreted mantle proteins are likely to be rapidly evolving.

Australia's free trade deal with the US may mean nanotherapies may be rushed through tests for safety, efficacy and quality, one critic says. But not everyone agrees
Australia may be forced to rush through inadequately tested and unsafe medical nanotherapies because of its free trade agreement with the US, a health technology regulation expert says.
Dr Thomas Faunce, a senior lecturer at the Australian National University college of law and medical school, says Australia is obliged under the free trade agreement (FTA) to make innovative pharmaceutical products more readily available.
Drugs and medical devices using nanotechnology could fall under this banner, he says.
Faunce, who presented his concerns at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne today, says as a result of the FTA, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) may come under pressure to rush trials of new nanotherapies, particulary during preliminary safety, efficacy and quality testing.
"The main concern is that the FTA puts obligations on the TGA to initiate a discussion [with US authorities] about fast tracking innovative medical products," he says.
"It's not quite sure exactly what that means but the concern is that we're still in a situation where it hasn't been definitively established that nanotechnology is safe."
Nanotechnology involves using extremely small particles on the scale of one billionth of a metre.
In medicine, it could be used to create tiny 'machines' that are introduced into our bodies to deliver medicine, diagnose disease or even fight cancer cell by cell.
But because the technology is so new there are concerns about its safety, Faunce says. 
This is because the minute size of the particles means they could evade our normal respiratory and immune defences to enter the lungs or even penetrate our skin.
There are fears that once in our bodies, nanoparticles could enter our circulatory and nervous systems, potentially becoming lodged in organs including the lungs and brain.
"Major concern with this unprecedented research and development is that engineered nanoparticles may present unique health risks when used in medical applications," Faunce says.
"They are highly reactive and mobile within the human body and there are currently no effective methods to monitor exposure risks."
Is this a problem?
Monash University's Professor Brian Priestly, director of the Australian Centre for Human Health Risk Assessment, says it's probably true that developments in nanotechnology are happening too fast for the regulators to keep up with them.
"But that's not to say that it's being ignored," says Priestly, who has worked with the TGA in the past.
"I know that the TGA looks very carefully at all sorts of innovative technologies so they'll certainly be looking at any developments in anotechnology."
A TGA spokesperson says rigorous testing is required for all new drug products and nanotherapies are no exception.
"Extensive, non-clinical, toxicological and clinical safety testing is required for all new drug products," the spokesperson says.
"No concessions or reductions in these requirements will apply to nanomaterials in therapeutic products."
The federal government is currently considering the need for a distinct nanotechnology regulatory body and is expected to release a national nanotechnology strategy in coming months.

Honey bees stick out their proboscis when they smell explosives. So could they do sniffer dogs out of a job?
Bees have been trained to sniff out explosives in a project scientists say could have far-reaching applications for security and the Iraq war.
Scientists at a US weapons laboratory say they trained honey bees to stick out their proboscis, the tube they use to feed on nectar, when they smell explosives in anything from cars and roadside bombs to belts similar to those used by suicide bombers.
Researchers at the Los Alamos National Laboratory have dubbed their research the Stealthy Insect Sensor Project. 
They trained bees to recognise substances by exposing them to the odour of explosives followed by a sugar water reward.
Among the substances they can sniff are dynamite and C-4 plastic explosives to the Howitzer propellant grains used in improvised explosive devices in Iraq. 
"When bees detect the presence of explosives, they simply stick their proboscis out," says research scientist Tim Haarmann.
"You don't have to be an expert in animal behaviour to understand it as there is no ambiguity."
The findings followed 18 months of research at the Los Alamos facility, the nation's leading nuclear weapons laboratory.
"We are very excited at the success of our research as it could have far-reaching implications for both defence and homeland security," Haarmann says. 
While scientists have trained wasps to respond to the trace of explosives, Haarmann says research with bees appeared to show more promise. 
Haarmann says the bees could be carried in hand-held detectors the size of a shoe box, and could be used to sniff out explosives in airports, roadside security checks, or even placed in robot bomb disposal equipment. 
He says the next step would be to manufacture the bee boxes and train security guards in their use. 
"It would be great to start saving some lives with this," he says.

This binary system regularly emits the most energetic gamma rays ever observed. The system consists of a huge star and a compact object, possibly a black hole
Astronomers have discovered an 'orbital clock' in the Milky Way, a gamma ray source 100,000 times more energetic than any other.
The repeated emission comes from a binary system where a compact object, possibly a small black hole, orbits a massive star about every 4 days.  
An international team of scientists reports its findings in the Journal of Astronomy and Astrophysics. 
Very High Energy (VHE) gamma rays in this system are produced when particles are accelerated to move at close to the speed of light.
This happens when particles from the strong stellar wind collide with particles from the compact object.
But the process is reversed when the gamma rays meet the intense ultraviolet light radiated by the star, and are absorbed. 
It is the production, then absorption, of the gamma rays that is responsible for complex variations in the signal.
The signal is strongest when the compact object is in front of the star and weakest when it is behind it.  
"This is the first time we've been able to identify this orbital variation in a high energy gamma ray source and it allows us to probe to much greater depth the astrophysics of gamma ray production and absorption," says Australian co-author Dr Gavin Rowell from the University of Adelaide. 
Neither the production nor the absorption processes are well understood. VHE gamma ray emission is rare and the object is one of just 30 such sources discovered in the past few years.
It is also the only one where the intensity of the emission changes in a regular fashion.
Rowell says a number of factors are involved in the signal's periodic patterns.
These include geometric effects relating to the orientation of the compact object to the star and the angle at which the system is seen from Earth.
"There is lots of interaction between events which leads to the flux profile we see.  The rules are quite simple but separating the influences of changes in the magnetic field, the intensity of the stellar wind and mechanisms contributing to particle acceleration and absorption is difficult," Rowell says.
"Orbital signatures like this are useful keys. They act as a probe of the changing environment as the compact object moves along its orbit and give a useful insight into how gamma rays are produced and what happens to them."
The source was detected as part of a survey of VHE gamma ray sources in the southern sky using the most sensitive ground based gamma ray detector, the High Energy Spectroscopic System in Namibia, southwest Africa.

The Antikythera Mechanism was so advanced in its mathematics and technology that the history of Ancient Greece may have to be rewritten
A 2100 year old clockwork machine whose remains were retrieved from a shipwreck more than a century ago has turned out to be the celestial supercomputer of the ancient world.
Scientists used 21st century technology to peer beneath the surface of the encrusted gearwheels of the so-called Antikythera Mechanism, made by the Ancient Greeks.
The researchers were stunned to find it could predict the ballet of the Sun and Moon over decades and calculate a lunar anomaly that would bedevil Isaac Newton himself. 
And nothing as complex was built for at least a thousand years, say the researchers, who publish their results today in the journal Nature.
"It's beautifully designed. Your jaw drops when you work out what they did and what they put into this," says astronomer Professor Mike Edmunds of Cardiff University.
"It implies the Greeks had great technical sophistication."
The Antikythera Mechanism was built in Greece around 150-100 BC and may be linked to the astronomer and mathematician Hipparchos.
But the machine did not surface until 1901 when Greek divers, who were exploring a Roman shipwreck, found 82 curious bronze fragments.
At first, these pieces, thickly encrusted and jammed together after lying more two millennia on the sea floor, lay forgotten.
But a closer look showed them to be exquisitely made, hand-cut, toothed gearwheels. 
The 29 gearwheels fitted together, possibly making some sort of astronomical calendar. But of what, exactly? 
The mystery unfolds
For a quarter of a century, the textbook on the strange find was a work written by a historian of science and technology, Professor Derek de Solla Price of Yale University.
He hypothesised that the machine in fact had 31 gearwheels, and did something pretty astonishing. 
It linked the solar year with a 19-year cycle in the phases of the Moon. This is the so-called Metonic cycle, which takes the Moon 235 lunar months to the same phase on the same date in the year.
Edmunds' team, gathering experts from the UK, Greece and the US, has now taken the tale several chapters forward.
21st century techniques
They used 3D x-ray computation tomography and high-resolution surface imaging to peek beneath the machine's surface, yet without damaging the priceless artefact.
There, they read inscriptions on the bronze cogs that had been unseen by human eyes since that Roman ship came to grief aeons before. 
The original device, they believe, is likely to have had 37 gearwheels and two clock-like faces, one front and one back.
It would have fitted into a slim wooden box measuring 31.5 x 19 centimetres, which was 10 centimetres thick. 
The machine was a 365-day calendar, which ingeniously factored in the leap year every four years. 
It not only provided the Metonic cycle, which was known to the Babylonians, it also gave the so-called Callippic cycle, which is four Metonic cycles minus one day and reconciles the solar year with the lunar calendar. 
It could also predict lunar and solar eclipses under the Saros cycle, a 223-month repetitive interplay of the Sun, Earth and Moon.
This function, presumably, would been useful for religious purposes, given that eclipses are traditionally taken as omens. 
The machine was also a star almanac, showing the times when the major stars and constellations of the Greek zodiac would rise or set and, speculatively, may also have shown the positions of the planets. 
Lunar anomaly
But even more impressive is a tiny pin-and-slot device that factors in a movement of the Moon that, for centuries, puzzled sky-watchers. 
In this so-called main lunar anomaly, the Moon appears to move across the heavens at different speeds at different times, the reason being its elliptical orbit around Earth.
"Newton used to say he would think about this until his head hurt," says Edmunds. 
This latter discovery prompts the scientists to wonder if the great Hipparchos, who drew up the first catalogue of the stars and wrote about the lunar anomaly in the 2nd century BC, may have had a hand in designing the mechanism. 
Adding circumstantial evidence to this theory is that the shipwreck was found to have jars and coins from Rhodes, where Hipparchos lived. 
The computer is so advanced in its mathematics and technology that the history of Ancient Greece may have to be rewritten, says Edmunds. 
"We now must ask: What else could they do? That's a difficult thing, because this is really the only surviving metallic artefact of its kind. Who knows what else may be lost?" 
Islamic science
It was not until the end of the first millennium AD and the golden age of Islamic science that anything so technologically wondrous surfaced again, if the archaeological evidence is a guide. 
This was an eight-geared astrolabe, depicting the movements of the Sun and Earth, by the Islamic astronomer al-Biruni in 996 AD. 
Had the Greeks' knowledge somehow survived and been transmitted across the centuries, to inspire al-Biruni?
Or had it withered away and disappeared, leaving Islamic scholars with the task of rediscovering what had been known 1000 years before?

Some scientists believe that the diversity of early Australians is explained by there being more than one founding population. But not everyone agrees
New genetic evidence suggests Australia may have been populated by two separate groups of humans, one arriving via Papua New Guinea, the other via Indonesia, a researcher says. 
But more work is needed to confirm the idea. And not all scientists agree that these latest results shed new light on the long-standing debate on how humans colonised Australia.
Dr Sheila van Holst Pellekaan, a molecular anthropologist from the University of New South Wales in Sydney, will present her research at a Australian Archaeological Association conference in Melbourne next month.
Previous genetic analysis shows that modern humans took two migration routes out of Africa 100,000 to 150,000 years ago, she says.
One group went north into Europe and Northern Eurasia, the other along the coast via Saudi Arabia, India and Southeast Asia.
Van Holst Pellekaan analysed mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from Aboriginal people in western New South Wales and Central Australia.
She says she found evidence of two ancient genetic groups that appear to be linked to these two migration routes.
Van Holst Pellekaan says some archaeologists argue there was more than one founding population of Australia and her research is the first genetic evidence that could be used to support this. 
It's possible that some Australians came in from the north via Papua New Guinea and the other took a more southerly route via Indonesia, she says.
Different views
Archaeologist Dr Colin Pardoe, who is speaking at the conference on a related topic, disagrees.
He believes the diversity of early Australians could have arisen from one group that came in from Southeast Asia and then diversified as it adapted to different environments.
Pardoe is not convinced van Holst Pellekaan has identified two founding groups.
"Are these two totally distinct groups that came in or are they representatives of one major group that came in that has all that diversity within it?" he asks.
This is a possibility that van Holst Pellekaan accepts.
"The idea of two founding populations is speculative," she says. "I can't prove it either way." 
Pardoe says more DNA samples from other places such as the Indonesian islands and Papua New Guinea would need to be analysed.
"We need to understand the pattern of variation in these large groupings to see where Australians are coming from," he says.
Professor Peter Brown of the University of New England in Armidale also says further data is required, including studies of Y chromosome DNA, as mtDNA only reflects the maternal line.
Van Holst Pellekaan says some Y-chromosome studies of Aboriginal people from Central Australia have found a connection with India, but there have been no comprehensive studies of this type.
Genetics reflects long Aboriginal history
Van Holst Pellekaan says despite the links with the global lineages that came out of Africa, the Australian groups are quite different from those shown in samples from Papua New Guinea, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Malaysia.
"[People] have to have been in Australia for a very long time for that diversity to generate. We're saying at least 40,000 years," she says.
Van Holst Pellekaan accepts the idea of tracing Aboriginal people back to Africa can clash with some cultural beliefs, which she respects.
"I simply present it to them as a scientist's way of seeing how the language groups might have related to each other," she says.
"I can only give them the information I come up with. I don't ask them to believe it."

Spider monkeys chew fragrant plants and 'anoint' themselves with the smelly mash. But no-one is sure why
What may be the most natural cologne in the world was recently discovered in a Mexican forest. The ingredients? Monkey spit and chewed up leaves.
According to a paper in the journal Primates, male Mexican spider monkeys chew the leaves of three aromatic plants: the Alamos pea tree, which has fragrant leaves and flowers, a flowering trumpet tree, and wild celery. 
Matthias Laska, a professor of zoology at Link&ouml;ping University in Sweden calls the ritual, which typically takes anywhere from 30 seconds to 2 minutes, monkey "self-anointing".
Laska and his colleagues observed the behaviour 20 times in two male spider monkeys that were part of a free-ranging group at the Parque de Flora y Fauna Silvestre Tropical in Veracruz, Mexico. 
The researchers determined the monkeys always applied just one plant species at a time. The application was routine, not unlike a man who regularly squirts on deodorant or cologne.
"In the majority of cases, the arm that did not hold the scent-bearing material was held high or grabbed a branch above the animal," Laska and his team write.
While this is the first reported case of such behaviour in wild Mexican spider monkeys, similar routines have been spotted among both male and female capuchin monkeys, owl monkeys, other spider monkeys and lemurs. 
In most of these cases, the scientists speculate that the leaf mash might have been used to mitigate topical skin infections or repel bugs.
But Laska and his team found that of the plants used by the Mexican spider monkeys, only wild celery is known to have insect-repelling compounds and antifungal properties. The other plants simply smell good.
The scientists, therefore, conclude that self-anointing "may play a role in the context of social communication, possibly for signalling of social status or to increase sexual attractiveness". 
In other words, monkeys could do it for the same basic reasons people use cologne.
Chemistry still a mystery
While the chemistry behind this remains a mystery, the odours may mimic those of fragrant, naturally occurring primate steroids, which are presumed to act as sex-stimulating pheromones.
Laska conducted an earlier study that found spider monkeys are particularly gifted at sniffing out such scents.
But not all monkeys want to smell like flowers and celery.
Dr Mary Baker, assistant professor of anthropology at Rhode Island College, has observed capuchin monkeys applying citrus and tobacco leaf mashes to their bodies.
Dr Christina Campbell, a scientist at the Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at the University of California at Los Angeles, observed the same behaviour in black-handed spider monkeys in Panama.
"In general, I agree with the [new] findings," says Campbell. But she hasn't yet ruled out other possible reasons for scent rubbing.
"I think the behaviour may be some kind of signalling, although I am not convinced," she says.
"I also wonder whether it may function to stimulate or clean the gland that they rub the plant mixture on."
Laska hopes future studies will resolve such questions about the fragrant ritual.

Children may have permanent brain damage after chemotherapy, experts say 
Chemotherapy damages brain cells, according to two studies published this week, leading to memory loss and confusion in cancer patients, and possibly permanent damage in young children.
Cancer patients have long complained of 'chemobrain', a nickname for loss of memory and inability to solve problems and in general think clearly often seen after chemotherapy.
While the effects may wane in adults after a few years, one expert points out that the effects may be more permanent in children with growing brains.
Dr Masatoshi Inagaki of the Breast Cancer Survivors' Brain MRI Database Group in Japan and colleagues tested more than 200 breast cancer patients, some who had chemotherapy along with surgery and some who did not.
They used magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, to take detailed pictures of the patients' brains one and three years after treatment. 
A year after 51 patients had chemotherapy, the researchers found significant regions of the brain were smaller, notably those important to cognition. 
Cognition includes learning, some types of memory and the ability to understand the surrounding world clearly. 
But in 73 patients screened three years after chemotherapy, there were no such differences, Inagaki's team reports in the journal Cancer.
"Results lead to the idea that adjuvant chemotherapy could have a temporary effect on brain structure," the researchers write. 
"These findings can provide new insights for future research to improve the quality of life of cancer patients," they add.
Deadly damage
A second study shows that drugs used to treat cancer may damage normal, healthy brain cells more than the cancer cells they are meant to target. 
Dr Joerg Dietrich and colleagues at the University of Rochester in New York worked with human brain cells in lab dishes.
They exposed them to common chemotherapy drugs such as cisplatin, carmustine and cytarabine. They also soaked cells from real human tumours in the drugs. 
The drugs killed more brain cells than tumour cells, they report in the Journal of Biology.
Low doses of the chemotherapy drugs killed 60-90% of brain cells called oligodendrocyte precursor cells and neurone precursor cells, but had little effect on most of the cancer cells.
To kill 80% of cancer cells, doses that killed 70-100% of the brain cells were required.
When they treated live mice with the drugs, Dietrich's team found that brain cells in the mice continued to die for at least six weeks after the end of treatment.
Straight to the head
Dr Patricia Duffner, a neurologist at the University of Buffalo School of Medicine in New York, says radiation therapy on the head has long been known to affect intelligence. 
"Cranial irradiation can be so devastating to the brains of young children [under three to five years] that, by the mid-1980s, many families opted not to treat babies and very young children who had malignant brain tumours," she writes in a commentary in the same journal.
"Very high-dose chemotherapy, requiring bone marrow transplantation or peripheral stem cell support, is now standard therapy for children with certain brain tumours, especially for the very young," she adds.
"There are no easy answers. We must balance the need for survival with quality of life."

The Ngarrindjeri people put the repatriated remains of their ancestors to rest. Image used with permission from the Aboriginal community
Aboriginal human remains stolen in the name of science are being reburied in traditional burial mounds using the latest technology to ensure that existing burials are not disturbed.
The reburial project, involving the Ngarrindjeri people of South Australia, will be discussed at the Australian Archaeological Association Conference in Melbourne next week.
Members of a thriving medical research community took Ngarrindjeri human remains during the 19th century and as late as the 1950s, says Flinders University archaeologist Dr Lynley Wallis, who is helping with the project.
She says literally thousands, if not tens of thousands, of bodies were removed.
"People were stealing bodies from graves around Adelaide," she says, adding that many traditional burial mounds were in sand dunes, which made it particularly easy for bodies to be taken.
"Sometimes it was within days or weeks [of burial]," she says. "Worse than that, they were being taken out of the morgue in Adelaide."
Remains were sent to places such as the British Museum and the Museum of Edinburgh in the UK, as well as the South Australian Museum and Museum Victoria in Australia, says Willis.
In 2003, the Museum of Edinburgh became the first to repatriate the remains of more than 300 Ngarrinjeri people.
Remains were not always complete sets of bones, she says.
"Sometimes it might be an organ in a jar. Sometimes it's a skull, sometimes it's a leg bone."
Some remains were up to 2200 years old, she says, and many of them had never been examined.
Voices of the Aboriginal community
Wallis is keen to emphasise she cannot speak on behalf of the Ngarrindjeri community, representatives of which were not immediately contactable.
But in an interview last year with a Flinders University researcher, chair of the Ngarrindjeri Heritage Committee, Uncle Tom Trevorrow, explained the need for reburial ceremonies for the repatriated remains of Old People, the term of respect used when referring to ancestors.
"We're forced to do a repeat of a funeral ceremony because other people have gone in and taken our Old People's bodies without listening to us or getting our permission," he said.
"We don't know what those Old People have been through, we don't know what they've done to them."
The customary burial ceremony involves smoking bodies to allow their spirits to travel and to be at rest.
Once disturbed from their resting places, this ceremony needed to be carried out again, Uncle Tom said.
Role of the archaeologists
Using the limited paperwork accompanying the remains, the Ngarrindjeri community has been identifying which burial mounds they were taken from.
"If they come from the river that's their country ... if they come from the lake that's their group," said Uncle Tom.
The first reburial took place at Hack's Point on 23 September this year.
To make sure they didn't disturb people and cultural objects already buried in the mounds, the community called on Wallis and others to help.
"The last thing they wanted to do was to disturb existing burials," says Wallis.
The team used various geophysical techniques to work out which areas in the burial mound they could dig up safely.
This is the first time such technology has been used for Indigenous reburials in Australia, says Wallis.
The researchers used a magnetometer to detect the mineral maghaemite, which could have formed from fires used during ceremonies.
The team also used electromagnetic induction that detects changes in moisture and conductivity of sediments that occur when ground is disturbed.
By combining the results of the two surveys the team identified a location in the burial mound where there had been no disturbance.
The remains of 23 people repatriated from the Museum of Edinburghwere reburied in the first ceremony.
"Thankfully our science worked and we didn't hit any existing burials," says Wallis.
Signs from the ancestors?
Wallis says the day before the first reburial a storm blew up over nearby Kangaroo Island, which Ngarrindjeri people call the "island of the dead", where spirits go after people have been buried.
They thought this was the old people stirring because they knew something was about to happen, says Wallis.
On the day itself, a large flock of pelicans flew over the burial ceremony, says Wallis who was present at the reburial.
Pelicans, known as ngori, are a totem for the Ngarrindjeri people and the flock were seen as the spirits of the old people coming to see the burial, says Wallis.
"It was so amazing, these huge flocks flying in formation. If you didn't believe in Indigenous connection to country, after going through that process you certainly would have."

Nanoparticles are already used in consumer products including toiletries
Fears about nanotechnology may be overblown, says an Australian expert in toxicology and environmental health.
Monash University's Professor Brian Priestly, director of the Australian Centre for Human Health Risk Assessment, says we need to put fears about the potential health risks of nanoparticles into perspective.
Priestly was among a number of nanotech specialists who spoke about nanotoxicology at the Australian Health and Medical Research Congress in Melbourne this week.
"I'm not saying that we don't have knowledge gaps that we have to fill," he says. "But some of the statements that are being made I think are extreme."
The federal government is expected to release a national strategy on nanotechnology in the coming months and is considering whether an independent regulator should be established to oversee this rapidly advancing field.
Priestly says it's unlikely that members of the general public will be exposed to nanoparticles.
"What we have to ask is what are the chances that we will be exposed to these very fine manufactured nanoparticles, because risk is really a function of toxicity and exposure," he says.
"These things may have slightly higher grades of toxicity than larger particles but a lot depends upon whether we're exposed to them and how we're exposed to them.
"If they get into the air and we inhale them, yeah, they're likely to present the same sorts of risks we have with other types of air pollution of very fine particles."
He also says the majority of nanoparticles will be safe because they're fixed in surface coatings.
Dr Kelly BéruBé, a lecturer in cell biology at Cardiff University in Wales, has been studying nanosized products of combustion like soot and coal ash as a model for engineered nanoparticles.
She says human have been exposed to these particles for as long as we have been burning things, and it's known they can cause inflammatory responses and cardiac problems.
She says these are the sorts of particles we should be worried about, rather than engineered nanoparticles.
"These are the ones that everybody's exposed to every day. It's highly unlikely that the average person like you or I is going to be exposed to any of these engineered ones," she says.
Uses of nanoparticles
Nanotechnoloy involves the manipulation of atoms and molecules for uses in medicine, research, computing and the creation of new types of materials and surfaces.
Nanoparticles are already used in a wide range of commercially available products including sun screens, cosmetics, shoe polish, crayons and even tennis racquets. 
The federal government says it has been assessing therapeutic products containing nanotechnology components for many years.
"Fumed silicon dioxide nanoparticle aggregates for example, have been use in food, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals for about half a century and carbon black nanoparticles have been used in rubber products for more than a century," a health department spokesperson says.
Sunblock creams using zinc oxide and titanium dioxide nanoparticles are also being manufactured in Australia.
Red flags
But Dr Paul Wright, associate professor in immunotoxicology at RMIT University and director of the research network Nanosafe Australia, says rapid recent developments highlight the need for caution.
He says engineered nanoparticles have unique and properties compared to the sort of particles BéruBé has been looking at.
"These are derivitised, these are functionalised nanoparticles, they can have totally unknown effects on the biological system," he says.
Dr Sam Bruschi is a consultant in medicinal chemistry, who recently finished a review of nanotech safety issues for the Australian Safety and Compensation Council.
He says the little that we do know about the health impact of nanotechnology has raised some red flags.
He says animal studies have found pre-cancerous lesions like fibrosis and granulomas in mice that have had carbon nanotubes aspirated into their lungs. 
Tumours associated with titanium nanoparticles, which are used in sunscreen, have been found in research animals, he says. And in the lab, "quantum dots kill cells quite happily".
"There are some smoking guns out there and all we have to do is find the bullets," he says.
Because of their size, nanoparticles can evade the body's normal respiratory and immune defences and once inhaled or absorbed through the skin, potentially finding their way into the nervous and circulatory systems and becoming deposited in organs including the brain.
Much of the concern has also focused on carbon nanotubes, because of fears they are the right size and shape to act like deadly asbestos fibres.
Jury's out
BéruBé says until we have microscopes powerful to actually track where nanoparticles are going in the environment and in our bodies, and what they actually do there, the jury must remain out about any pending health catastrophe.
"We don't have the technology there to see exactly what these particles are doing, so we can't tell you exactly what the health impacts will be," she says.
"Unregulated use [of nanoparticles] could open society up to the asbestos of the 20th century.
"But we've been living with [combustion-derived nanoparticles since caveman times and we've learned to adapt to it."

We may soon be getting weather reports from Mars without sending probes into space. And scientists say an old way of gathering data may do the trick
Astronomers have shown that an old technique for mapping the topography of Mars from Earth could be used in a novel way to map the Red Planet's weather. 
The thin atmosphere on Mars consists almost entirely of carbon dioxide.
And before spacecraft images revealed the planet's surface features, astronomers tried to use variations in the density of carbon dioxide to map the topography, with mixed results.
Now preliminary ground-based images of Mars taken in the near infrared region of the spectrum, which is most sensitive to carbon dioxide, have revealed interesting surface features.
These show remarkable agreement with the accurate topographical data obtained from the Mars Orbiting Laser Altimeter aboard the Mars Global Surveyor. 
The density of carbon dioxide also indicates the atmospheric pressure at the surface, which is subject to huge seasonal variation as carbon dioxide readily transports from one pole to another.
So PhD candidate Sarah Chamberlain from the Australian Centre for Astrobiology at Macquarie University says the technique could be now be used for remotely sensing changes in atmospheric pressure in the Red Planet's dynamic weather system.  
"Since we now have an accurate topographic map of the Martian surface, we can use the technique to look for variations from the topography to indicate regions of high and low pressure," she says.  
This will provide a pressure map that will help with understanding weather patterns through seasonal changes across the planet.  
"Weather is important to understand on Mars for landing spacecraft and looking at the atmospheric dynamics on other planets," says Chamberlain. 
Measurements of the surface pressure distribution on Mars provide the key data needed for testing general circulation models of the Martian atmosphere.
The only pressure measurements that have been made so far are from the Viking landers in 1976 and later the Pathfinder Rover, which cannot give a global picture of the Martian atmosphere.
Chamberlain is co-author of a paper in the latest Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia, which suggests that until a network of surface stations can be established on Mars, remote-sensing techniques such as the one demonstrated will provide the only way of obtaining such data.

Criminal psychopaths might not stop their attacks because they may have learned to dampen their brain's response to other peoples' distress signals
A biological defect in the way blood flows in the brain rather than a psychological defect could be one reason why some people become criminal psychopaths, a new study shows. 
Researchers from the Institute of Psychiatry at King's College London monitored the emotional responses of six men who had committed repeat offences such as attempted murder, rape with strangulation and grievous bodily harm. 
All six subjects scored highly on the Hare Psychopathy Checklist, a test that looks for the presence of cunning, manipulative or exploitative behaviours as well as lack of guilt or remorse.
It is thought that people with psychopathic disorders lack empathy because they cannot process when someone is distressed, for instance a face that looks scared.
To test this, the people in the study were shown images of fearful, happy and neutral faces.
Their brains were then imaged with functional MRI, a type of brain scan that shows which parts of the brain 'light up' in response to these images.
Their brain scans were then compared to those of healthy control subjects. 
"We've never been able to look directly in the brain before and what we found is that when psychopaths were exposed to frightened faces the distress cue didn't increase the psychopath's blood flow. It decreased it," says author Professor Declan Murphy.
He adds psychopaths might not stop their attacks because they may have learned to dampen their brain's response to other peoples' distress signals. 
Tom Fahy, professor of forensic mental health and co-author of the study, which is published in the latest issue of the British Journal of Psychiatry, says criminal psychopathy may be inherited or acquired through very deprived and abusive childhoods.
He adds the findings of the study open possibilities for new treatments other than counselling therapies and could be used to identify people who had a higher risk of re-offending. 
"Psychopaths currently respond pretty poorly to treatment but this biological problem could be used as a marker for people who say they have recovered but actually haven't," Murphy says.

The future is nuclear, says a new report into Australia's rich uranium resources
New nuclear technology will cut waste so significantly that we may no longer need to dump it underground, according to an Australian government report.
The report, tabled in parliament this week, also says Australia should lift restrictions on uranium exploration, mining and export because at present nuclear power is the only "reliable and proven" way of cutting greenhouse gas emissions.
"Advanced nuclear reactors and spent fuel reprocessing technologies are now being developed which will significantly reduce the quantity and toxicity of nuclear waste," says the report, Australia's uranium - greenhouse friendly fuel for an energy hungry world.
"These technological advances could potentially obviate the need for geological repositories altogether."
The new generation of reactors could also reduce the isolation period needed for waste to "just a few hundred years".
But Dr Mark Diesendorf of the Institute of Environmental Studies at the University of New South Wales, has dismissed these comments as "propaganda for the nuclear industry".
He says the 440 nuclear reactors operating around the world today are "almost identical" to those of 25 years ago.
"This is speculation about future reactors that are not on the market," he says of comments made in the report.
Reducing waste
Nuclear waste consists of spent uranium, plutonium and other by-products, which critics like Diesendorf say needs to be managed for up to hundreds of thousands of years.
Professor Stephen Lincoln, an expert in nuclear energy and uranium from the University of Adelaide, says it's possible to recycle some of this waste by turning it into a mixed uranium-plutonium oxide, or MOX.
"So instead of just using uranium oxide in the fuel rods you use mixed uranium and plutonium. That burns up the plutonium but it also produces nuclear power," he says.
Professor Leslie Kemeny, Australian foundation member of the International Nuclear Energy Academy and a consultant nuclear physicist, says three reactors around the world are already using this so-called MOX.
Kemeny says we'll also get better at developing ways of using waste from nuclear reactors, not only as an energy source but for use in industry and hospitals.
"I firmly believe ... everything that is taken out of the reactor core to be put into a waste depository is highly valuable," he says.
Improving safety
Kemeny says new technology will not only cut back waste, but will make nuclear reactors safer.
He says pebble-bed reactors are being developed that package the uranium in graphite balls rather than iron rods, making waste easier to handle.
"With the generation IV reactors you will go for a fuel element that is enriched particles of uranium interspersed with silicon and carbon in a small ball or hexagonal shaped fuel element," he says.
"You can circulate these balls in and out of the reactor or just drop in a set of orange-sized or tennis ball-sized and take out ones that have been there a long time."
And because pebble-bed reactors are cooled by gas like helium or carbon dioxide they reduce the risk of overheating and a Chernobyl-style meltdown, he says.
But Deisendorf says according to his calculations pebble-bed reactors would produce 13 times more nuclear waste than conventional ones.
"You don't have rods but you have 13 times the quantity of nuclear waste because you're embedding the fuel in pebbles, and the pebbles occupy a lot of volume and it all becomes highly radioactive," he says.
Lincoln says while pebble bed rectors are "fine in principle", none are currently being used to generate power and the fuel is more expensive to produce.
"When you bring in any new technology it's got to be proved and tested and the final analysis is, is it commercially competitive in terms of producing electricity by comparison with the currently used reactors?" he says.
Lincoln says no degree of technological sophistication will ensure 100% safety at nuclear reactors and adds it's difficult to imagine a reactor so advanced that it produces no waste at all. 
"It's true that modern reactors are better in that respect, they produce less waste. But they're always going to produce it," he says.
"It's still quite a significant issue because at this point in time there is not one single permanent storage for high-level nuclear waste."

Reef sharks in Australia's Great Barrier Reef are being fished to the brink of extinction, a new report suggests
Southeast Asia's voracious appetite for shark fin soup may be contributing to a dramatic drop in the number of reef sharks in Australia's Great Barrier Reef, a marine scientist says.
Dr Sean Connolly and colleagues from James Cook University found a 10-fold decrease in shark numbers in areas where fishing is allowed after conducting the first shark census in the World Heritage listed area.
The study, published in the latest issue of the journal Current Biology,  looked at two species of shark, the grey reef shark (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos) and the whitetip reef shark (Triaenodon obesus).
The sharks were observed across four fishing management zones, ranging from strict no-entry to open fishing.
"We found [where fishing is strictly banned] shark numbers are 10 times higher than in zones where there is fishing," Connolly says.
"We can see that the populations are severely depleted already but we also have projections that say that those declines are ongoing and quite rapid." 
The study sent out divers to count shark numbers as well as using mathematical modelling taking into account births, deaths and population growth patterns.
It found whitetip reef sharks are declining at an average rate of 7% a year with a 17% rate of decline for grey reef sharks. 
The study predicts that if the trend continues populations will drop to 5% and 0.1% of what they would be without fishing.
Shark fin soup
Conolly says the results show that fishing is threatening reef sharks with ecological extinction, where their numbers will be so small they will no longer play a role in the marine ecosystem.
Some overfishing could be driven by the international market for shark fins, he says.
People fishing in certain areas of the reef are able to catch sharks and sell their fins separately, although they must bring back the carcass.
"There probably is some selling of shark fin to the international market and that pressure is likely to increase as the price for fins goes up, because there will be growing demand and an increasingly depleted shark populations," Connolly says.
Sharks are also often viewed as a pest by anglers looking for other game, such as coral trout, he says. Or they could be caught by accident.
"One of the main causes of decline in sharks is because they are what's called a bycatch species, which means you catch them by mistake when you're trying to get something else," he says.
Total landings of all shark species on the Great Barrier Reef have increased about four fold in the past 10 years, Connolly says.
Impact on the reef
Sharks sit at the top of the reef food chain but Connolly says it's hard to predict exactly how their loss would affect the coral reef ecosystem.
"Some modelling suggests that removing sharks can erode the resilience of coral reefs because if you take sharks out the smaller predators in the system could increase in number, and that could potentially decrease number of grazing seaweed eating fish," he says.
The study concludes that "immediate and substantial" reductions in shark fishing are needed for reef populations to recover.

A base on the Moon would be used to test technologies needed for future trips to Mars
The US space agency says it plans to build a permanently occupied base on the Moon, most likely at its south pole. 
The base will serve as a science outpost as well as a testbed for technologies needed for future travel to Mars, NASA says.
Construction will follow a series of flights to the Moon scheduled to begin by 2020.
"We're going for a base on the Moon," says Dr Scott Doc Horowitz, NASA's associate administrator for exploration from the Johnson Space Center in Houston.
Plans for what the base will look like and what astronauts would do there have yet to be determined.
Similarly, NASA has not projected a date when the base would go into operation. 
The Moon's polar sites are preferred to equatorial regions because of more moderate temperatures and longer periods of sunlight, which is critical for the solar-powered electrical systems NASA plans to develop.
Eventually, nuclear power may be used to augment or replace the solar energy systems. 
Scientists also suspect the poles have resources such as hydrogen, ice and other materials that could be used to support life. 
"It's exciting," says NASA deputy administrator Shana Dale. "We don't know as much about the polar regions."
The US has already announced plans to develop new spacecraft to travel to the Moon and land on its surface for the first time since the last Apollo flight there in 1972.
It also plans to provide a communications system linking Earth and the Moon. 
But NASA doesn't plan to go to the Moon alone. The US will look for international and commercial partners to share the expense and possibly provide components such as additional power systems, living quarters and resources for lunar surface travel. 
NASA is not expecting a budget increase to pay for the program. Rather, it will transition funds currently being used to support the space shuttle into the Moon exploration program as the shuttle fleet is phased out. 
The shuttles are set to be retired in 2010. By that time, NASA plans to have finished building the space station, leaving the Moon initiative as a successor to both programs.

Earthquakes and crystallising lava are clues that volcanoes are about to blow, new research shows
Better predictions of when volcanoes are going to erupt may be possible with a new computer model developed by Australian scientists.
Dr Alina Hale from the Earth Systems Science Computational Centre at the University of Queensland and colleagues have been investigating a type of repetitive earthquake that typically occurs before volcanic eruptions.
"Quite often these long-period earthquakes are observed before a volcano does something nasty," says Hales.
"It's basically an indication that something's going to happen, but no-one has actually worked out how they occur."
Recently, scientists have begun to think the quakes may be caused by areas of instability in volcanic lava called shear bands. But until now there has been no accurate way to explain the connection.
"It's been eluding us exactly what the volcano is trying to tell us with these signals," Hale says.
"People have had a go at trying to correlate shear bands with these earthquakes, but so far it hasn't been convincing."
At the Australian Institute of Physics conference in Brisbane today, Hale described how her new model incorporates processes such as the formation of crystals in lava to make the correlation more precise.
"It was a case of putting two and two together to pinpoint how these signals are being generated," she says.
When Hale used real-world data from Soufri&egrave;re Hills Volcano, which devastated the island of Montserrat, her model confirmed that shear bands were being generated at the depths where long-period earthquakes occur.
More research needs to be done to further refine scientists' understanding of the processes behind long-period earthquakes, Hale says, but the new model could be an important development.
"We're now getting closer to understanding where and why these signals occur," she says.
"Basically it could potentially give us the ability to predict eruptions."

Neanderthal foot bones in a block of cemented sand and clay from the El Sidrón cave in Spain
Neanderthals had different ethnic groups, often starved and probably practised cannibalism.
That's the news from a recent study of the skeletal remains from eight Neanderthals who lived 43,000 years ago in northwest Spain.
The findings, published online in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, raise questions about Neanderthal lifestyle.
Why, for instance, would they have resorted to cannibalism? What harsh conditions caused the wear and tear evident on surviving bones?
There are two possible reasons why Neanderthals would have dined on their dead, according to lead author Dr Antonio Rosas, a scientist in the palaeobiology department at the National Museum of Natural Sciences in Madrid.
"One is that they needed to eat whatever was at hand, including human flesh, because ecological conditions for their survivorship, such as extreme cold weather and no meat from hunting, were really hard," Rosas says.
The other possibility, he says, is that "this was done in the context of something we may think of as symbolic".
Rosas suggests the virtual absence of animal remains at the site, a cave called El Sidr&oacute;n, may point either to ritual killings or unsuccessful hunting. Neanderthals are thought to have subsisted primarily on meat.
Toothy clues
The Neanderthals studied ranged in age from infancy to young adulthood. Their teeth revealed that tooth growth often stopped abruptly due to illness or malnutrition. 
Adolescence in general appears to have been a particularly hard time, possibly due to separation from parents and the resulting need for self-sufficiency.
Cut marks associated with butchery were found on some of the remains, particularly those of the younger individuals.
The skeletal remains also reveal that these Neanderthals possess a different bone structure than individuals found elsewhere in Europe.
It appears that Neanderthals fell into at least two basic ethnic groups that coincided with their north-south geographical distribution.
Southern Neanderthals from the Iberian Peninsula, the Balkans, the Middle East and Italy had broader and shorter faces than northern Neanderthals from populations living north of the Pyrenees, the Alps, portions of Asia and central and eastern Europe, the researchers say.
Scientists are now debating whether interbreeding with modern humans occurred and why all of these Neanderthal groups appear to have gone extinct.
"It does look, from a variety of data, that Neanderthals were subject to episodes of extreme scarcity, with which their cultural and social systems sometimes couldn't cope," says Professor Steven Kuhn, an anthropologist at the University of Arizona.
"There could also be a link between boom-and-bust subsistence and occasional cannibalism."
Sharing out the chores
Kuhn and colleague Professor Mary Stiner theorise that modern humans better divided labour along the lines of gender and age.
Instead of everyone working toward the next big kill, women and children in early modern human groups devised other food-obtaining strategies, such as gathering fruits and nuts.
Such diversification underlies our success, even today, they say.
"It is clear that the kinds of cooperative, diversified economies practised by recent hunter gatherers are 'underwritten by' our sophisticated cognitive and communicative abilities," says Kuhn.
"That's what allows people to negotiate and maintain their complex patterns of dependency and cooperation, keep each other in line, etc. But whether the cognitive development is cause or consequence isn't clear to us."

Transparent module of skinny sliver cells, which provide a greater surface area to capture sunlight
The cost of producing solar panels could be sliced by more than 60% thanks to technology being developed by Australian researchers, physicists heard today.
Professor Andrew Blakers, director of the Centre for Sustainable Energy Systems at the Australian National University, says 'sliver technology' could reduce the price of solar power to below the current retail price of electricity.
And he says this could make it cost-effective for householders to buy solar panels rather than electricity from the grid.
Blakers describes the latest refinements in the technology at the Australian Institute of Physics conference in Brisbane.
The system works by taking a standard solar cell about 1 millimetre thick and cutting it into tiny slices that are just 120 micrometres wide.
"Imagine a standard solar cell is a loaf of bread. When you put it out in the sun it generates energy based on its surface area," Blakers says.
"Now imagine you cut that loaf up into slices and lay them horizontally. You get a lot more surface area."
This technique allows researchers to use much smaller amounts of expensive silicon to generate the same amount of electricity.
This can also keep manufacturing costs down, as all the processing steps normally carried out on solar cells are done while the slices are still in the 'loaf'.
"We're looking at major reductions in the total cost without the need for major scientific breakthroughs," Blakers says.
"It's about doing a good engineering job using known scientific principles, in contrast to some other technologies."
The sliver technology is also efficient at converting sunlight to electricity, he says.
In recent months, the researchers have achieved efficiencies over 20%, making it the world's most efficient commercial thin-film solar cell.
But further developments would be needed, such as figuring out how to cut thinner slivers, he says.
Blakers invented the technology with colleague Dr Klaus Weber and developed it with funding from energy supplier Origin Energy and the Australian Research Council.
Blakers and Weber won the Australian Institute of Physics' Walsh Medal for their work.

Would you use car tyres made using nanotechnology?
The public has a neutral attitude towards the risk of nanotechnology and will accept some risk from specific products if their benefits are high, a new US survey has found.
The first large-scale survey of its kind is published in the current issue of the journal Nature Nanotechnology.
"Our results showed that nanotechnology was seen as relatively neutral," say Professor Steven Currall of University College London and colleagues.
The survey found people perceived nanotechnology as less risky and more beneficial than a number of other technologies such as genetically modified organisms, pesticides, chemical disinfectants and human genetic engineering. 
But they saw it as less beneficial than solar power, vaccinations, hydroelectric power and computer display screens.
The researchers also studied people's acceptance of four hypothetical nanotechnology applications - a drug, a skin lotion, car tyres and refrigerator gas coolant.
The researchers defined the environmental and health risks of each application and they found that people judged risks and benefits as a package.
"When the benefits are low, consumers are more concerned about risks than when benefits are high," they say.
The researchers say if the public is to have a measured and informed response to nanotechnology in the future, they need easy access to information on risks and benefits.
"Now is the time to educate the public aggressively with facts about the risks and benefits of nanotechnology," they say.
But Australian researcher, Dr Stephen Healy of the School of History and Philosophy of Science at the University of New South Wales, says most people don't just trade-off risks and benefits to decide whether to accept a technology.
People's trust in decision-makers also play an important role, says Healy, whose research interests include risk and public involvement in decision-making on new technologies.
He also says the researchers mistakenly suggest risks are a property of technologies themselves in isolation.
But whether or not nanoparticles present a risk, for example, will be partly determined by what people do with them, says Healy.
"It's not simply a matter of public perception and it's not simply a matter of the way they're made, it's a matter of the way they're used," he says.
Healy is not surprised the survey found the public has a neutral view on nanotechnology.
"Nanotechnology is very much an emergent technology and the existing commercial applications are very low profile to say the least," he says.
Professor Jim Falk of the Australian Centre for Science, Innovation and Society at the University of Melbourne, says the survey findings call for genuine public engagement on new technologies like nanotechnology.
"We have no national capacity in Australia for engaging the public in those issues except through the media and commissions of inquiry," he says.
Over 5500 people were involved in the web and telephone survey, which was funded by the US National Science Foundation and Rice University in Texas.

This gully deposit, which scientists say is evidence of water on Mars, formed sometime between August 1999 and February 2004. So does this mean that water is still flowing today?
Photographs of Mars show features that most likely were made by water flowing on the planet today, says the US space agency.
"No one expected what we found today," says Dr Kenneth Edgett, a scientist with Malin Space Science Systems in San Diego. "We are talking about liquid water that is present on Mars right now."
The images were taken by NASA's Mars Global Surveyor, which had been studying the Red Planet for a decade before an apparent mission-ending failure last month.
The discovery raises the prospect that life could exist on Mars today, says Dr Michael Meyer, lead scientist for NASA's Mars Exploration Program.
The agency has mounted a series of increasingly sophisticated missions to look for signs of past water on Mars in hopes of identifying areas that could have been suitable for life to form.
"Maybe we no longer have to think about following the water, but watching the water," Edgett says.
The conclusion that water flows on Mars today is based on photographs the Global Surveyor took of gullies etched in the Martian soil.
Two sites in particular caught researchers' eyes because there were noticeable changes between pictures taken six years ago and ones snapped in 2004 and 2005.
Both show the gullies had filled with a light-coloured deposit, which is believed to be frozen water.
Scientists believe the water emanated from deep within the planet and gradually welled up toward the surface. Once it encountered the frigid Martian air, however, it froze, forming an ice dam.
Water continued to build up underground until there was enough pressure to burst the ice cap and allow a jet of water to flow down the channels.
The amount of water is about what would be needed to fill five to 10 swimming pools, Edgett says.
The findings will be followed up by a new higher-resolution camera aboard NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, which began its mission last month.
The Global Surveyor team also found new impact craters, raising the prospect that meteorite hits are a concern as NASA begins to think about sending human explorers to Mars.

Big brown bats, like this one, navigate over long distances using the Earth's magnetic field as a guide
Scientists believe a species of bat has an in-built magnetic compass to find its way home over long distances, in addition to its famous echolocation, which guides it around its neighbourhood. 
Princeton University batologists publish their findings today in the journal Nature.
The researchers used radio telemetry aboard a small aircraft to track big brown bats (Eptesicus fuscus) that were released 20 kilometres north of their home.
They first tested a control group of bats, which headed due south towards the roost without a problem. 
Two other groups of bats were then exposed to a false magnetic field for 90 minutes, 45 minutes before and 45 minutes after sunset. 
One field was 90&deg; clockwise and the other was 90&deg; anticlockwise from magnetic north.
The point of this was to see whether the bats used Earth's magnetic field as a guide and, if so, to see whether the bats used sunset or the stars as an additional cue. 
The 'clockwise' group of bats flew due east, while the 'anticlockwise' group went due west, suggesting that they had been using a magnetic compass that may have been calibrated by the sunset. 
But some of the bats corrected their course and arrived home safely, which implies that, like homing pigeons, they can make a fix if a navigational glitch occurs.
World's longest bat tongue?
Meanwhile, another study, also published by Nature, sheds light on a remarkable bat species whose tongues are one and half times longer than their bodies. 
The nectar bat (Anoura fistulata) lives in the cloud forests of the Ecuadorean Andes, feeding on flowers whose nectar is hidden at the end of long funnels.
Nathan Muchhala, of the University of Miami, suggests the extreme length of the bat's tongue coevolved with the long flowers of the plant.

A message sent using entangled, or spooky, particles of light has been beamed across the ocean
Scientists have used quantum physics to zap an encrypted message more than 140 kilometres between two Spanish islands.
Professor Anton Zeilinger from the University of Vienna and an international team of scientists used 'spooky' pulses of light to send the message.
They say this is an important step towards making international communications more secure.
Zeilinger described the study this week at the Australian Institute of Physics meeting in Brisbane.
The photons they sent were linked together through a process known as quantum entanglement.
This means that their properties remained tightly entwined or entangled, even when separated by large distances, a property Einstein called spooky.
The group's achievement is important for the emerging field of quantum cryptography, which aims to use properties such as entanglement to send encrypted messages.
Research groups around the world are working in this field. But until now they have only been able to send messages relatively short distances, limiting their usefulness.
Zeilinger's team wants to be able to beam the messages to satellites in space, so they could theoretically be relayed anywhere on the planet.
To test their system, the team went to Tenerife in the Canary Islands, where the European Space Agency operates a telescope specifically designed to communicate with satellites.
Instead of pointing the telescope at the stars, Zeilinger says, the scientists turned it to the horizontal and aimed it towards a photon sending station 144 kilometres away on the neighbouring island of La Palma.
"Very broadly speaking, we were able to establish a quantum communication connection," he says.
"We worried a lot about whether atmospheric turbulence would destroy the quantum states. But it turned out to work much better than we feared."
The results suggest it should be possible to send encrypted photons to a satellite orbiting 300 or 400 kilometres above the Earth, he says.
"This is our hope. We believe that such a system is feasible."
The next step is to try the system out with an actual satellite, a project which is likely to involve the European Space Agency and others.
"This is about developing quantum communications on a grand scale,"
Zeilinger says.
His team expects to publish its results soon.

Embryonic stem cells could be grown into islet cells to treat diabetes, say researchers
Australian stem cell researchers will start negotiating with IVF clinics to access human eggs following this week's landmark decision to overturn a ban on creating cloned embryos specifically for scientific research.
Despite objections from Prime Minister John Howard and the new leader of the opposition, Kevin Rudd, the lower house of the Australian parliament last night voted to allow the process.
This paves the way for laws to implement the recommendations of the Lockhart review into stem cell research.
"I think it's fantastic news. It's raised the morale of the scientists," says Professor Alan Trounson, international director of the Australian Stem Cell Centre. "We're thrilled."
His team wants to use somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) to investigate options for disease diagnosis and treatment once the new laws are enacted.
SCNT involves the creation of an embryo by inserting a nucleus from a patient's body cell into an egg cell that has had its nucleus removed.
Under the new laws such an embryo would be permitted to grow for 14 days and provide scientists with stem cells for use in research.
But the first step for researchers like Trounson is to get hold of a ready supply of human eggs and he's not sure whether there will be enough.
"We're looking forward to seeing whether we can obtain eggs for these studies. That will be the critical component I think," he says.
"We'll be talking to our colleagues in the infertility clinics because they will be the connection to obtaining human eggs for making embryonic stem cells."
Eggs a limiting factor
Neuroscientist Professor Peter Schofield of the Lockhart review agrees that finding eggs will be a key issue.
"In practice we will probably find that eggs may be a limiting factor," he says.

Gorillas' social habits make it easy for the Ebola virus to spread among and between groups, researchers say
The Ebola virus may have killed more than 5000 gorillas in West Africa, enough to send them into extinction if people continue to hunt them too, researchers say.
The virus is spreading from one group of the already endangered animals to another, the international team of experts report today in the journal Science. 
And it appears to be spreading faster than it is among humans. 
"The Zaire strain of Ebola virus killed about 5000 gorillas in our study area alone," write primatologist Dr Magdalena Bermejo of the University of Barcelona in Spain and colleagues.
Ebola haemorrhagic fever is one of the most virulent viruses ever seen, killing 50-90% of victims.
The World Health Organization says that it killed 1200 people infected between its discovery in 1976 and 2004.
The virus is transmitted by direct contact with blood, organs or other bodily fluids. There is no cure or good treatment, although several groups are working on vaccines. 
Several experts have noted that chimpanzees and gorillas are also killed by the virus, and suspect that people may have caught it from infected apes, perhaps when hunting them. 
But it is not clear whether the gorillas are infecting one another, or being repeatedly infected and reinfected by another species of animal, perhaps a bat. 
Bermejo's team has been studying a group of western gorillas in the Lossi Sanctuary in northwest Republic of Congo.
"By 2002 we had identified 10 social groups with 143 individuals," they write. 
Quick deaths
In 2001 and 2002, several outbreaks of Ebola had begun killing people along the Gabon-Congo border.
By October 2002, the researchers had found 32 dead gorillas, and of the 12 they tested for Ebola, nine were positive. 
"[Bermejo] knew these animals individually, and in the course of three months they all died," says Dr Peter Walsh, an ecologist at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, who worked on the study. 
Eventually the researchers counted 221 dead gorillas. Based on what they and other experts knew, Walsh extrapolated what the total impact must be to come up with the estimate of 5500 gorillas killed by Ebola in that area. 
He says no one knows precisely how many gorillas are in the world and how many have died.
"But I know what's the typical mortality rate in those areas that are affected. It's an educated guess. A quarter of the gorillas in the world have died from Ebola in the last 12 years. It's huge," Walsh says. 
"Add commercial hunting to the mix, and we have a recipe for rapid ecological extinction," the researchers write. 
Their report supports a study published in July that showed gorillas were spreading the virus within their social groups. 
"Our work is complementary to that; we have shown it is spreading between groups," Walsh says. 
Walsh says gorilla groups share territories, often eating fruit from the same tree, although at different times. Faeces from a sick gorilla could easily infect other gorillas. 
Gorillas and chimpanzees also touch and handle the bodies of other apes when they find them, something known to transmit Ebola between humans. 
"The issue here is that there is a certain amount of work that needs to be done to take these vaccines that already exist and put them into gorillas," Walsh says.

Africa is suffering from a double blow: malaria and HIV. Now scientists say that one could exacerbate the other
Malaria may be helping to spread HIV across Africa, the continent hardest hit by AIDS, scientists say. 
The way the two diseases interact greatly expands the prevalence of both among people in sub-Saharan Africa, a team of scientists say today in the journal Science.
Malaria, a mosquito-borne disease caused by a parasite, greatly boosts viral load, the amount of HIV in the blood of infected people, they say.
This makes them more likely to infect a sexual partner with HIV.
"Higher viral load causes more HIV transmission, and malaria causes high HIV viral load," says lead study author Dr Laith Abu-Raddad of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle and the University of Washington. 
Abu-Raddad, an AIDS researcher, estimates that malaria has helped HIV infect hundreds of thousands and perhaps millions of people in sub-Saharan Africa.
At the same time, HIV fuels malaria's spread because HIV-infected people are more susceptible to malaria as a result of HIV ravaging the immune system, the body's natural defences, the researchers say. 
AIDS and malaria are concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa. And Abu-Raddad says scientists were puzzled when they realised that the risky sexual behaviour by people in the region was not by itself sufficient to explain the swift spread of HIV, so other factors must be involved. 
They focused their work on Kisumu, a Kenyan city by Lake Victoria where HIV and malaria are both common.
