"For example, a webcam linked with our software could process your image, encode the correct emotional state and transmit information to a Web site." 
It could also be useful in online teaching to show whether someone understands what is being explained and in improving road safety by determining if a driver is confused, bored or tired. 
"We are working with a big car company and they envision this being employed in cars within five years," Robinson says, adding that a camera could be built into the dashboard. 
Anyone who doesn't want to give away too much information about what they are feeling can just cover up the camera, he says.

Lava flows from a super eruption half a billion years ago in Australia covered hundreds of thousands of square kilometres 
Scattered rafts of black lava over northern and central Australia are really part of one gigantic volcanic field that appears to be one of oldest and largest on Earth, geologists believe.
If so, the half billion year old eruption might be the culprit in the first mass animal extinction event in the history of life.
Australian geologists used the chemical signatures of the far-flung basalt lava rocks and their ages to connect them to a single huge volcanic eruptive episode between 505 and 508 million years ago.
The newly identified Kalkarindji Continental Flood Basalt Province covered at least 650,000 square kilometres with more than 190,000 cubic kilometres of lava, report geologists Dr Linda Glass and Dr David Phillips, who were at the Australian National University when the research was undertaken.
Bigger than thought
"It may be a lot larger than we think," Phillips says.
He says since the paper appeared this month in the journal Geology he's been getting calls from other Australian  geologists who say they know of even more distant pieces of what could be the same mega lava deposit.
Unlike episodic and hacking explosive volcanoes like Mount St Helens or Mount Pinatubo, flood basalts literally pour lava out onto the Earth's surface in often vastly greater quantities and over far longer periods, perhaps many hundreds of thousands of years, according to some geologists.
That means they can cover a lot more ground.
Younger recent flood basalts can be found mostly intact in places like the Columbia River region of the US Pacific Northwest.
But at a half-billion years old, the Kalkarindji Continental Flood Basalts have been heavily eroded and buried, leaving only far-flung hints of its former glory.
"This is part of a growing picture," says Paul Renne, director of the Berkeley Geochronology Center in California.
Other large volcanic provinces have been identified in the same way.
First in one area by a few geologists, then with a flurry of discoveries by other geologists who were working on other parts of the puzzle, but hadn't seen the larger context.
Link to Cambrian mass extinction
Two things make the Kalkarindji Continental Flood Basalt Province discovery special and robust, says Renne.
One is that it's the oldest such lava formation dated using the very reliable Argon-40/Argon-39 analysis, and Phillips is one of the world's top "Argon-Argon" researchers, Renne says.
But, Renne adds that chemical aging of the far-flung rocks makes the process of dating them slightly less reliable.
The second thing is that the timing of Kalkarindji is right at the first major die-off of animals after they first exploded onto the scene about 535 million years ago during the Lower Cambrian Period.
"That time span was when (animal) life on Earth really took off," says Phillips.
"We have the mass proliferation of species."
"Things just took off like wildfire," agrees Renne.
Then at somewhere around 500 million years ago many of the strange new beasts were mysteriously wiped out.
A massive release of lava could have caused such an event by releasing a lot of heat and climate changing gases into the atmosphere.

Practitioners of feng shui say it can improve your living and working environmment. But does it also work for web pages?
Chinese feng shui and the ancient Indian science of vaastu shastra can boost business by helping web designers create better pages, say experts who are marrying traditional philosophies with the internet. 
Believers in vaastu shastra say the system seeks to create harmony between people, objects and the five elements of earth, fire, water, air and space.
They say it can be directly applied to the web, just as it is to home design. 
The philosophy of feng shui has also been used for centuries to bring balance and harmony between people and their environment.
"Just as the world comprises of the five basic elements, each web site has five elements and these need to be in balance with one another," says Dr Smita Narang, author of Web Vaastu .
The book has proved popular with businesses. 
How it works
"Earth is the layout, fire is the colour, air is the HTML, space is name of the web site, and water is the font and graphics," says Narang.
He says each must be chosen carefully to strike a balance with the other.
 Narang, a vaastu expert who has spent four years analysing around 500 sites, says a web site that disregards vaastu rules will have few hits and business will suffer.
 An essential element of feng shui is the idea that unnecessary objects allow free flow of energy, followers say.
They say this principle can also be applied to making better websites and generating more visits.
A Web site where the colours hurt your eyes, the music offends your ears or has too much information is probably too cluttered and does not give a positive flow of ch'i," says Vikram Narayan, a Mumbai-based feng shui practitioner. 
The trick, Narayan says, is to remove items on your web site that serve no purpose, and keep the things that serve you well. 
Brijesh Agarwal of Indiamart, a company offering business solutions to small and medium-sized enterprises, says he has had mixed results on the five sites that his company has designed according to vaastu principles. 
"We have found that on three sites the number of hits has increased by 60&nbsp;% but the other two sites have not been affected," Agarwal says.
"I can't say for definite that the positive results are due to vaastu or due to increased marketing, but I hope that vaastu has helped."

The conditions that determine whether a male will grow up gay may be present before birth, research suggests
The last male child in a family of many boys is more likely to be gay than a boy who is born first or has fewer brothers, according to new research.
The Canadian study, published in the US Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences online journal, suggests that being gay starts in the womb.
The study, led by Dr Anthony Bogaert of Brock University near Toronto, found that having older brothers increases a man's chance of being gay, even if the older brothers don't live with the younger sibling.
Adopted or step brothers don't appear to have an effect.
"The most consistent bio-demographic correlate of sexual orientation in men is the number of older brothers (one has) and not social influences," Bogaert reports. 
"Only biological older brothers, and not any other sibling characteristic, including non-biological older brothers, predicted men's sexual orientation, regardless of the amount of time reared with these siblings." 
There's no evidence that similar patterns apply to girls, he says.
Fraternal birth order effect
The results are a variation of the so-called "fraternal birth order effect" theory on homosexuality in men. 
The researchers didn't investigate the mechanism at play, but Bogaert says his study indicates that biological, rather than social or child-rearing factors, are at play.
One possible explanation is that during pregnancy a mother's immune system recognises male foetuses as foreign and creates "maternal anti-male antibodies".
These antibodies could affect the part of the brain that determines sexuality.
The effect is cumulative and therefore more likely to cause homosexuality in the last of several sons born to the same mother.
"These results support a prenatal origin to sexual orientation development in men and indicate that the fraternal birth order effect is probably the result of a maternal "memory" for male gestations or births," he says.
Female foetuses aren't affected because mothers are themselves female, so the mother doesn't create antibodies against daughters. 
Bogaert reports that the age of the mother also appears related to the sexual orientation of her sons, "with homosexual men's mothers being significantly younger than the mothers of heterosexual men".
Gay staircase effect?
Professor Roger Short, a reproductive biologist in the faculty of Medicine at Melbourne University, says there could be a social element in younger brothers with lots of older male siblings becoming gay.
"I wouldn't be surprised if you come from a large unisex family where you're one boy amongst many, and the last in the line, that you've got a slightly socially deprived environment," he says.
"That could make you more aligned with ... the same sex because you'd be so ignorant and terrified about the opposite sex."
But he says while having a female "sandwiched" between two males in utero can have a masculising influence in species like rats and mice, there's no biological evidence for Bogaert's theory of maternal antigens producing gay boys.
"No one's ever suggested that maternal antibodies to something produced by a male foetus could have a long lasting effect to act on subsequent male foetuses," he says.
"So each subsequent male foetus would be a little more gay than the one before it.
"You would have a sort of gay staircase effect."

New technology aims to convert footsteps into renewable energy
Vibrations from passing trucks, the rumbling of speeding trains and even the footfall of busy city commuters could be captured and converted into energy to light walkways and buildings, engineers say.
A London-based architectural firm is working on a project that aims to harness the pulse of a city and use it as a renewable energy source.
Facility Architects director Clair Price says tens of thousands of people can pass through urban hubs like train stations during rush hour.
"You don't need to be a maths genius to realise that if you can harness that energy... you can actually generate a very useful power source that is currently being wasted," she says.
Price's team has financial and technical support from several organisations for the proposal.
"My first reaction when I saw it was wow, this is fantastic," says Tony Bates, business development manager at Scott Wilson, an engineering consultancy firm based in the UK.
"As an engineer of course, you can really see that this can really work."
Bates and Price are now in the process of developing a joint partnership to make the idea a reality.
The architectural team is working with university research groups to finish two vibration-harvesting prototypes by December.
Good vibrations
The first is a staircase that will contain hydraulic or piezoelectric technology in the risers.
The technology will pick up kinetic energy from commuter footfalls and convert it into an electrical current.
Climbing stairs requires more force, which means there's more energy to be tapped.
Engineering experts from the University of Hull hope to develop a system that will convert at least 50% of the six to eight watts each person typically generates while walking.
The current will be stored in a battery, which can be used to provide energy for lighting or electronic devices.
The second prototype is a wireless lighting system that will use tiny generators with components designed to resonate at the same frequency as surrounding vibrations.
The resonance will either move a magnet relative to a coil or put stress on a crystalline structure inside a generator to produce a current.
Light-emitting diodes connected to such vibration harvesters could illuminate the underside of arches.

The double vortex at Venus' south pole
Venus has a bizarre double vortex that whirls in the atmosphere above its south pole, a new mission to the planet has found.
The unmanned Venus Express spacecraft spotted the "double eye", formed by winds of super-hurricane force, in its very first swing around Venus, says the European Space Agency (ESA).
The Venus Express pictures also show the presence of a collar of cold air around the vortex structure, possibly due to the recycling of cold air downwards.
Previous missions to Venus have spotted a similar structure over the planet's north pole and glimpsed at stormy atmospheric behaviour at the south pole. 
The winds on Venus spin westwards at hundreds of kilometres per hour, taking only four days to complete the rotation of a planet that is just under the size of Earth. 
This "super-rotation," combined with the natural recycling of hot air in the atmosphere, would logically induce a vortex over each pole, but the mystery is why there should be two vortices. 
"We still know very little about the mechanisms by which the super-rotation and the polar vortexes are linked," says Dr H&aring;kan Svedhem, the mission's project scientist. 
"Also, we are still not able to explain why the global atmospheric circulation of the planet results in a double vortex and not a single vortex," he says.
"Atmospheric vortextes are very complex structures that are very difficult to model, even on Earth."
Venus Express is Europe's first dedicated mission to Earth's closest planet. 
It went into elongated orbit around Venus on 11 April, equipped with scanners aimed at deciphering the enigmatic Venusian atmosphere. 
The elongated orbit, lasted 9 days and ranged between 350,000 and 400 kilometres from Venus' surface
Since 7 May Venus Express has been circling the planet in its final 24-hour orbit, ranging between 66,000 and 250 kilometres from Venus.
The planet seems to have a case of runaway global warming, and understanding the mechanisms that drive this could be of use in dealing with climate change on Earth.
Venus's mean surface temperature is 457&ordm;C - hot enough to melt lead and even hotter than Mercury, the closest planet to the Sun. 
Its atmosphere is 96% carbon dioxide, with yellowish clouds of sulfur and sulfuric acid droplets.

A new tool for world peace?
Video games can help save the world by raising awareness of the world's downtrodden, a group of socially conscious game designers say.
The creators of free educational games such as "Darfur is Dying" and "PeaceMaker" met with humanitarian activists at The New School university in New York this week for the third Games for Change annual conference. 
The idea is to use video games to educate youth about real-world issues - fighting poverty, surviving in war-torn Sudan and negotiating Middle East peace. 
And while there is violence in the games, it is being perpetrated by real-life players such as warring countries, not by the person playing the game. 
"It's the next generation of activism," says Stephen Friedman, general manager of MTVu, a television network owned by cable channel MTV aimed at college students that created a grant program encouraging educational games. 
"Given this generation lives online, it's heartening to see them using this incredibly powerful medium in a very potent way," Friedman says.
Gaining popularity
The idea appears to be gaining popularity. 
"Darfur is Dying," which allows players to avoid being killed in violence-plagued Sudan, was downloaded more than 750,000 times in the past two months.
"Food Force," created by the World Food Programme at the United Nations, has been downloaded off the internet more than 2 million times. 
Just 40 developers and activists attended the first Games for Change conference in 2004. About 250 people participated this year. 
Large gaming companies have expressed some interest in the market's potential, Bob Kerrey, the president of The New School and a former US senator from Nebraska, says.
"I do see some glimmers of reason to be optimistic that games ... can be used to accomplish educational missions and improve people's quality of understanding of what's going on in the world," Kerrey says. 
"The question for us ... is how do I use it to accomplish something good?" 
In the shoes of a refugee
"Darfur is Dying" puts players in the shoes of a Sudanese refugee. Plunked down in the middle of the violence, players must make it to a water well and try to survive for seven days in a camp besieged by militia.
In "PeaceMaker," players take the role of either the Israeli prime minister or the Palestinian president and try their hand at situations ranging from diplomatic talks to responding to military attacks. 
PeaceMaker co-creator Eric Brown says he hopes to usher video games into a new socially conscious arena. 
"We believe in the power of interactive media and we think it has a lot of positive potential," says Brown, a Carnegie Mellon University graduate student. 
"Just by putting someone in the shoes of the other side, they may think of a perspective they might not have thought of before."

The feeling of being watched make us do the right thing, researchers have found
Forget about installing closed-circuit surveillance cameras - a simple, low-cost defence against thieves and freeloaders may be a photocopy of a pair of eyes. 
Behaviour researchers at the Newcastle University in the UK conducted a sly experiment on their colleagues and found that people were encouraged do the right thing when they were being 'watched' by a pair of eyes on a poster.
The study, by Dr Melissa Bateson and team, is believed to be the first to test how cues of being watched affect people's tendency for social co-operation in a real-life setting.
The study is reported online ahead of print publication in the Royal Society's journal Biology Letters.
Honesty box
For their experiment, Bateson and her colleagues made use of a long-running 'honesty box' arrangement in a common room used by around 48 staff in the university's psychology department.
Academics were asked to put money in the box for any tea, coffee and milk they used without anyone checking to see whether they were actually doing so. 
The honesty box had been operating for many years, so users had no reason to suspect an experiment was taking place. 
Over 10 weeks, the researchers placed a poster above the honesty box listing prices of tea, coffee and milk. 
The poster also featured an image banner across the top that alternated each week between different pictures of flowers and eyes. 
The eye pictures varied in the sex and head orientation but were all chosen so that the eyes were looking directly at the observer. 
Each week the research team recorded the total amount of money collected and the volume of milk consumed as this was considered to be the best index available of total drink consumption. 
The team then calculated the ratio of money collected to the volume of milk consumed in each week. 
The eyes have it
On weeks when the "eyes" image was shown, takings were 276% higher than during the "flower" weeks. 
"I was really surprised by how big the effect was as we were expecting it to be quite subtle but the statistics show that the eyes had a strong effect on our tea and coffee drinkers," says Bateson.
The researchers say the study suggests that humans are "strongly attuned" to subconscious cues about behaviour that could damage their reputation. 
"Our brains are programmed to respond to eyes and faces whether we are consciously aware of it or not," says Bateson.
The researchers say that being seen to co-operate is a good long-term strategy for individuals because it is likely to mean others will return the gesture when needed.
"Our findings suggest that people are less likely to be selfish if they feel they are being watched, which has huge implications for real life," says Bateson. 
"For example, this could be applied to warnings about speed cameras. A sign bearing an image of a camera would have to be actively processed by our brains, as it is an artificial stimulus. Our research and previous studies suggest drivers would react much more quickly and positively to natural stimuli such as eyes and faces." 
The group now hopes to expand the study to involve a larger sample population.

As oil reserves dwindle, it is being suggested we could use underground explosions to increase the permeability of rocks and make it easier to extract the remaining oil
Creating artificial seismic waves, similar to those that occur during an earthquake, could help squeeze more oil from natural reservoirs, say scientists.
Dr Emily Brodsky of University of California, Santa Cruz and colleagues report their findings in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"Shaking increases permeability," says Brodsky, an assistant professor of earth sciences.
"Permeability governs how fluid flows through rock, whether it's water or oil, so this has practical implications for oil extraction," she says. 
Brodsky and colleagues also found that the amount of permeability is directly related to the amplitude of the shaking. 
"Potentially if you could increase permeability you could greatly increase the available oil you could tap out of a reserve," she says. 
One way of doing that, in principle, is by mimicking the effects of an earthquake, using, for example underground explosions.
"If we understood the physics of the permeability enhancement well enough, the vibrations could be tuned to increase with the flow of oil," Brodsky says.
Clues from water seepage
The scientists made their discovery after studying 20 years of data of water seeping in and out of wells during seven earthquakes in an area of California. 
They found that water levels in the wells rose and fell gradually according to local weather and rainfall.
But superimposed on these long-term trends were regular, daily variations of a few centimetres owing to the 'solid Earth tides'.
As the motion of the Moon around the Earth makes local sea levels rise and fall tidally each day, so this and the Earth's rotation causes tidal 'squeezing' of the solid Earth. 
The effect is tiny, but it squeezes the porous rock of the aquifer that feeds the wells, pressurising the water held in the pores and forcing regular changes of up to 3 centimetres in the well water.
As the squeezing subsides, well water flows back into the aquifer.
But how quickly this happens depends on the permeability of the rock.
The team noticed that every time an earthquake occurred the permeability jumped and the surrounding rocks became up to three times more permeable.
A few months after the tremor the rocks relaxed back into its original state and permeability returned to normal levels. 
The scientists are planning more studies to better understand what aspects of the shaking makes the permeability increase.
They are also interested in studying how seismically induced changes in fluid flow within geological faults might trigger further earthquakes.

NASA says another major incident in launching the space shuttle would cast doubts on the program
NASA is ready for a second - and likely last - attempt to recover from the 2003 Columbia disaster and resume construction of the half-built International Space Station.
After more than three years and US$1.3 billion since the Columbia accident, the countdown has begun for the launch of the space shuttle Discovery at 5:49 am Sunday Australian Eastern Standard Time.
"Everyone's been excited and kind of anxious to get into a launch countdown," NASA test director Jeff Spaulding said at a press conference this week. "They've worked hard to get us to this point."
NASA's chief says it's time to move, despite objections from key safety and engineering officials who unsuccessfully argued for additional modifications before Discovery flies.
NASA administrator Mike Griffin acknowledges he is taking a chance, but not with the lives of the astronauts, who could stay aboard the station for nearly three months while they wait for a new ride home if Discovery should suffer Columbia-like damage during its liftoff.
In 2003 Columbia was struck by a chunk of foam weighing nearly a kilogram that fell off its external fuel tank and smashed into its left wing. 
The damage was undetected until after the shuttle broke apart as it flew through the atmosphere for landing 16 days later. All seven astronauts aboard died.
Some foam loss still expected
Last year, NASA flew its first mission since the accident, testing not only a new tank design, but also a myriad of inflight inspection techniques, heat shield repair materials and other safety improvements. 
Large pieces of foam insulation again fell off the tank and the fleet was grounded again.
NASA still expects some foam loss, particularly from areas that cover metal brackets holding pressurisation lines and a box of cables to the outside of the tank. 
But any flyaway foam is expected to be too small to do damage, shuttle managers said.
With the fleet's 2010 retirement date looming and plans to build a new vehicle to transport crews and cargo to the station and eventually the moon, NASA has neither the time nor money to handle more serious shuttle problems.
"If we have another major incident in launching the space shuttle, I would not wish to continue with the program," Griffin said.
Equipment and supplies
Launching will be only the beginning. 
The shuttle is scheduled to dock at the space station two days later to deliver more than 2,000 kilograms of equipment and supplies, as well as a new crewmember, European astronaut Thomas Reiter.
The station has been operating with just two-man crews since Columbia's demise to save on supplies while the shuttle, which delivers the bulk of the station's cargo, was grounded.
The most critical equipment includes replacement parts for the station's mobile transporter, which was shut down after it inadvertently severed a set of cables that provide power, video and data. 
Without the transporter, which is a small cart that runs along tracks on the outside the station to move equipment to various work sites, station assembly cannot continue.
One of up to three spacewalks planned during the flight is devoted to repairing the transporter. 
Astronauts Piers Sellers and Michael Fossum are also scheduled to test an extension to the shuttle's 15-metre-long robotic arm to see if it is stable enough to serve as a work platform for emergency inflight heat shield repairs on currently inaccessible parts of the shuttle.

The study showed children who stuttered showed greater emotional "reactivity" to everyday stresses, like having a toy taken away
Preschoolers who stutter may have more difficulty controlling their emotions than other children their age, a study has found - suggesting that emotional factors contribute to the speech disorder.
Dr Edward Conture, a US professor of hearing and speech sciences at Vanderbilt University in Nashville and colleagues will report their findings in the Journal of Communication Disorders.
Stuttering is a common speech problem that typically becomes apparent between the ages of 2 and 5 years old. Children may repeat or draw out words or parts of words, or have difficulty beginning a word.
The exact cause of stuttering is unknown, but it probably involves a "complex interaction" between genes and environment, says Conture.
Stuttering is believed to have a strong genetic component, as it often runs in families. 
But it has also long been suspected that emotional development may contribute to the disorder, says Conture. 
His team found that preschoolers who stuttered were typically more excitable than their peers with normal speech, and tended to have a harder time calming down or shifting their attention away from a stressful situation. 
The findings are based on reports from parents of 65 preschoolers who stuttered and 56 children who did not. Both groups of parents completed a standardised questionnaire on child behaviour. 
Three general differences between the two groups emerged, Conture says. 
Children who stuttered showed greater emotional "reactivity" to everyday stresses, like having a toy taken away; it took them longer to settle down once they were excited or upset; and they were less adept at shifting their attention away from the stressor, often becoming fixated on it instead. 
The researchers suspect that poor attentional control, leading to higher levels of emotional reactivity may contribute to the development of stuttering in children who are predisposed to the speech problem. 
Findings support parents' observations
Conture says the findings are in line with what parents often tell their child's doctor or speech therapist: that emotional outbursts or excitement seem to trigger stuttering episodes. 
He says parents should tell their health care provider if they notice that their child regularly has strong emotional reactions to everyday challenges or changes in their daily routine. 
Parents may be able to help their child by demonstrating ways to calmly cope with stressful situations, says Conture. 
He also notes that children can have difficulty controlling not only negative emotions, but excitement over positive events as well; so it may not be a good idea, he said, to tell your child about a trip to somewhere exciting months beforehand. 
No one knows yet whether helping children better regulate their emotions will aid their stuttering problems, but Conture says the current findings "tell us this is something we should look at." 
He also emphasises that parents should not feel guilty about any role emotional control might play in stuttering. "There is no evidence that parents cause their children to stutter," Conture says.

Only 30% of people surveyed felt comfortable with GM plants for food and only 18% felt comfortable with GM animals for food
Australians are becoming more comfortable with new technologies like stem cell research but still have strong reservations about genetically modified foods, a new survey shows.
The survey, conducted by the Australian Centre for Emerging Technologies and Society at Swinburne University in Melbourne, asked more than 1000 people about their views on emerging technologies.
"Overall, Australians are optimistic about science and technology," says Professor Michael Gilding, director of the centre that conducted the survey, the Swinburne National Technology and Science Monitor.
The poll has been conducted each year since 2003 and the latest results were gathered in 2005. 
"The interesting thing about the last three years is that people seem to be becoming more comfortable with the technologies that we've been monitoring," Gilding says.
On the subject of stem cell research, Australians seem to be more comfortable compared to 2004, the survey shows. 
Research conducted in public institutes garnered a higher approval rating, and men tended to be more comfortable than women with the research.
But when the respondents were asked about genetically modified crops or animals, their reaction was decidedly more negative.
"That was the stand-out from our point of view," Gilding says. "Overall, people are still very uncomfortable with those technologies."
Only 30% said they were comfortable with GM plants for food, the researchers found.
When respondents were asked to rate their comfort level with GM crops, they gave an average score of 3.9 on a scale where zero was 'not at all comfortable' and 10 represented 'very comfortable'.
The survey also found that just 18% of people were comfortable with genetically modifying animals for food, giving an average score of 3.1 out of a possible 10.
In the end, people are probably weighing the perceived risks of GM foods against their benefits, Gilding suggests. "I suppose the bottom line is that they don't see any benefit for themselves."
Craig Cormick, manager of public awareness for the government's Biotechnology Australia, says that broad questions about attitudes to GM food can miss subtleties in the way people think about the issue.
For example, individuals will view the risks and benefits of GM foods differently depending on the food, he says. "Attitudes to GM wheat will be different to doughnuts with GM soy in them."
In other findings, the survey showed that 80% of people agreed that science and technology are continuously improving our quality of life. This figure has been consistently high since the first survey in 2003.
Respondents also said they most strongly trusted science information they get from the CSIRO, universities, hospitals and scientists. In general, they did not trust the media.

The 'fertilising effect' of rising CO2 on crops like wheat could be only half as much as previously thought
Increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide may be less of a boon to crop agriculture than previously thought, according to a new study 
Plant biologist Dr Andrew Leakey of the University of Illinois at Urban-Champaign and colleagues report their findings in today's issue of the journal Science.
To date, IPCC scientists and others have said increased photosynthesis due to higher carbon dioxide levels could offset crop losses brought about by higher temperatures and lower soil moisture in a warmer global climate. 
But Leakey and colleagues predict the 'fertilising effect' of rising CO2 will be only half as much as has been thought by 2050.
"What we're saying is the fertilisation effect of CO2 will not be as good a thing as was previously thought," says Leakey. "The current predictions are over-optimistic."
The researchers say the IPCC's data come from old experiments on crops grown in greenhouses and shelters that don't properly capture real field conditions.
Studies using special field experiments show the actual benefit from rising CO2 to world staples, such as corn, rice, sorghum, soybeans and wheat, they say.
The field experiments involve Free-Air Concentration Enrichment technology experiments, in which crops are grown in a standard field, but are surrounded by special contraptions that allow CO2 to be released across them to simulate increasing atmospheric concentrations.
"It's very much more real world," says Leakey.
He says unlike in glasshouse experiments, the plants receive natural light, wind, temperature, rainfall and have as much root volume as they need.
The field experiments also allow for pests and diseases that are part of real world conditions.
"When you do these experiments in the field under realistic simulations of future conditions we see about 50% of the response [to increasing CO2] that was previously seen," says Leakey.
Leakey says the results are averaged from a number of field experiments involving different crops in the US, Switzerland, New Zealand and Japan.
He says good data is not available for the tropics and more research on this and on other areas, such as wheat production in Australia is needed.
There also needs to be more field experiments to study the impact of changing ozone, temperature and drought on agriculture, says Leakey.
He also says it may be possible to breed crops that are better able to make use of increasing CO2 levels.

An unusual Antarctic sea spider with five pairs of legs. Its large proboscis is protruding towards the bottom of the picture
Weird spider-like creatures that live at the bottom of the ocean and use a 'straw' to suck on their prey are baffling scientists.
These sea spiders, some of which are blind, are defying scientific classification. 
Marine zoologist Dr Claudia Arango of the Australian Museum in Sydney agrees they are arthropods, but which type? 
She presented her research on these unusual and poorly understood animals recently at the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research meeting in Hobart.
"They are very weird looking animals," says Arango.
For over 100 years, scientists have been puzzling over how exactly to classify sea spiders or pycnogonids.
They crawl along the bottom of the sea floor, sometimes more than 6000 to 7000 metres down, where they live in the dark, feeding on slow-moving soft-bodied sponges and sea slugs.
The creatures are segmented and have an exoskeleton, which makes them an arthropod, the same grouping as crustaceans, insects, centipedes and spiders.
But they also have a very strange collection of features, including a unique feeding structure.
"They have a proboscis that's like a straw that they insert into the animals and suck out the juices," says Arango.
Such features make it difficult to fit them into any of the known groups of arthropods.
"They look like spiders, but they are not real spiders," says Arango. "It's been very hard to place them in a position within the tree of life."
Arango has been studying the diversity and evolution of sea spiders.
She has been using DNA and morphology to construct a family tree, using 60 species of sea spiders from all over the world.

Discovery poised for launch
Bad weather has forced the US space agency to postpone the launch of the space shuttle Discovery.
The next launch is set for 04:38 Wednesday Australian Eastern Standard Time (18:38 Tuesday UTC). 
The decision by NASA to cancel lift-off came minutes after the seven crew members boarded the spaceship, even before the vessel's hatch was closed.
Hours before, NASA forecasters estimated there was only a 30&nbsp;% chance that weather conditions would favour a launch, as thunderclouds menaced the Kennedy Space Center. 
"We've concluded that we're not going to have a chance to launch today," launch director Mike Leinbach told the crew as they sat strapped into their shuttle seats. 
"OK, we copy," said shuttle commander Steve Lindsey. "Looking out the window, it doesn't look good today, and we think that's a great plan."
Too many risks
The mission management team's chairman John Shannon confirmed bad weather had prevented the launch.
"We had the vehicle ready to go, the crew ready to go and it's just that one thing that we really don't control, the weather, that kept us from launching," he told reporters.
Any rain during lift-off might damage the spaceship's heat-shielding tiles, and a lightning strike could knock out the computers that control the ship. 
Even thick, high clouds can make a launch hazardous.
Discovery's mission is only the second since the 2003 Columbia accident, and another disaster or serious problem could end the shuttle program.
NASA is hoping to fly 16 more missions to complete the A$134.5 billion (US$100 billion) space station before the shuttle fleet is retired in 2010. 
Debates over safety
Shuttle safety has been at the forefront of the program since Columbia disintegrated on re-entry in 2003, killing seven astronauts.
NASA has twice redesigned the shuttle's fuel tank, which shed insulating foam that triggered the accident. 
The agency's top engineer and chief of safety wanted more repairs on the tank before Discovery was launched, but NASA administrator Michael Griffin overruled them, arguing that if foam falls again from the fuel tank and damages the shuttle, the crew could stay aboard the space station and await rescue.
Griffin says the debate over safety is a good thing. 
"NASA had been criticised in the past for adhering to groupthink, for enforcing a needless conformity in decision-making," he said on CNN's Late Edition."
"We have difficult, technically complex and subtle decisions to make ... We did the best analysis we can, and we make a decision, and I'm comfortable with that." 
Delaying the launch would put more pressure on the shuttles, which are the only vehicles that can deliver and install the station's remaining trusses, solar arrays and laboratories. 
The agency plans two more flights this year and about four a year until the station is finished and the fleet is retired. 
NASA had hoped to resume space station construction last year, but the shuttle's fuel tank failed its first test flight.
Engineers then removed two long wind deflectors from the tank, which had shed foam during Discovery's 2005 lift-off.

We have the technology to clone animals and even humans, but what have we gained ten years after the first sheep was cloned from an adult cell?
This Wednesday marks ten years since a lamb named Dolly, born in Scotland, made international headlines as the globe's first cloned mammal.
She also triggered a storm of dreams, dread and ethical polemic that hasn't abated since.
A river of money and hope, directed into the quest for cures for cancer, heart degeneration, Alzheimer's and other crippling disease, has also flowed from the event. 
But there has been anguished debate, bitter opposition and the crafting of laws and guidelines to restrict or shape cloning research.
In Australia, a legislative review by former federal court judge John Lockhart last year recommended lawmakers lift the current ban on therapeutic cloning.
However, a number of government ministers oppose the recommendation and Prime Minister John Howard has promised a party room debate in August before a decision is made.
Questions have also been raised about what, exactly, scientists have achieved with the creation of Dolly.
"Where has Dolly taken us?" asks Sue Mayer, a doctor who is a member of GeneWatch UK, a British watchdog that monitors biotechnology. 
"The biggest worry is that she has taken us down a blind alley.
"Rather than tackling the root causes of disease, we are going for hype and quick fixes which may never deliver. 
"And she's opened this prospect of reproductive cloning, a door which scientists try to keep open but which we should firmly close."
Somatic cell nuclear transfer
The technique that led to Dolly is called somatic cell nuclear transfer and has remained essentially unchanged over the decade. 
A mammalian egg is taken, and its nucleus, the DNA program for making life,  is removed.
 The nucleus is replaced through a microscopic glass tube by the nucleus of a cell from the animal to be cloned. 
The reconstructed egg is then treated with a jolt of electricity and placed in a dish of nurturing chemicals to make it divide.
A few days later it becomes a cluster of cells big enough to be transplanted into the surrogate mother's uterus. 
Dolly, created at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh, was named after Dolly Parton, the big-busted country and western singer, because the cell that was cloned came from a sheep's mammary gland. 
Her lab name, rather less media-friendly, was 6LL3.
 It later emerged that the same team, managed by Ian Wilmut, had previously created two sheep clones from embryonic cells.
So, strictly speaking, Dolly was the first mammal to be successfully cloned from an adult cell.
Not all good news
After this breakthrough, other cloned species swiftly followed: horses, bulls, pigs, mice, rats, rabbits, cats and dogs and others. 
But the miscarriage rate of transplanted eggs is extremely high, and of those embryos that make it to term, many have deformities or, as happened with Dolly, die prematurely, a clear warning to any scientist mad or foolish enough to try to make a cloned baby. 
 The suspected cause is that the genetic software isn't transferred entirely, or is somehow damaged in the transfer. 
As a result, the machinery malfunctions - genes don't switch on or off as they should in the complex ballet of making proteins.
So if cloning is frustrating, costly and potentially risky, why bother with it? 
The most alluring reason is medical. 
A cloned lab animal such as a mouse can provide a very useful standardised tool for experiment. 
And a farm animal that can be engineered and cloned to produce rare pharmaceutical proteins in its milk, Dolly was created with this in mind, could help save lives and ease suffering.
Embryonic stem cells and ethical firestorms
But the most glittering prize of all is to harness cloning to embryonic stem cells, the primitive master cells of early-stage embryos that famously have the power to develop into almost any tissue of the body.
Researchers believe embryonic stem cells can some day be coaxed into regenerative tissue that could repair brain cells, nerves, kidneys, livers and other organs damaged by disease.
So if these stemcells are copies of the patient's own DNA, they would not be rejected by the immune system.
But here comes the ethical firestorm. 
Some religious groups already oppose the use of human embryonic cells, saying that this tissue has the same value as a life.
Yet there is an added queasiness about human cloning that is shared by many others, even if the immediate goal is therapeutic and nothing is created beyond a tiny cluster of cells, a further step will have been taken towards baby cloning. 
At the moment, patient-specific embryonic stem cells remain beyond the horizon.
The only scientist to have claimed to have made them, South Korea's Hwang Woo-Suk, was unmasked in January as a fraud.
As for reproductive cloning, many countries introduced laws after a renegade sect, the Raelians, claimed in late 2002 to have produced the world's first cloned baby. 
That claim has never been independently confirmed or even examined, and most scientists scoff at it.
That said, many also predict that the first cloned human is only a matter of time. 
"The (reproductive cloning) laws that are in place are pretty well-established throughout the world, but there are also laws in place against murder and suicide," says James Bradley, a professor of cell and developmental biology at Auburn University in Alabama.

Plants like corn could be a green source of plastics using a new technology to turn starch into other products
Scientists have come up with a way to produce a chemical from fruit sugar that they say is remarkably similar to one that comes from petroleum.
The method, reported by Professor James Dumesic of the University Wisconsin, Madison, could put plants such as corn on par with petroleum, reducing our dependency on petroleum products and creating more environmentally friendly ones.
"The nice thing about using biomass as a replacement for all these petroleum products is that it is greenhouse neutral," saysYuriy Roman-Leshkov, who with Dumesic and colleagues reported their findings in the current issue of Science.
When a plant-based product eventually decomposes or is burned, as in the case with fuel, it doesn't introduce additional carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, the way petroleum products do, he says.
Nice idea, but how's it done?
It's a great idea, but finding an efficient, cost-effective way to turn the starch into other products is difficult.
Molecules that come from petroleum are easy to work with and can be strung together in different combinations to produce everything from the polyester of a leisure suit to the polypropylene of a fleece jacket to the polyethylene terephthalate of a two litre bottle of soft drink.
Petroleum molecules are also cost efficient. Almost all the petrochemical that goes into making a product ends up in the product, so there is very little waste.
Not so easy with biological molecules
But doing the same thing with biological molecules is not so easy.
"Biological molecules tend to be much more complex, so because of that, doing specific chemistry to make a specific molecule is more challenging," says Brent Shanks, associate professor of chemical and biological engineering at Iowa State University.
"You are going to have to develop new processing paradigms," says Shanks, who isn't a member of the research team.
Dumesic and his colleagues think they have developed a new paradigm.
First, they dissolve sugar and water and then add a catalyst to the mix. Next, they mix in an organic solvent and heat it to 180&deg;C.
The process causes the sugar to lose three water molecules, which blend in with the rest of the water. The leftover substance becomes the chemical hydroxymethylfurfural, or HMF.
HMF looks and behaves a lot like a petroleum-based molecule and could be strung together in different combinations to produce plastics and fuels.
The challenge, says Shanks, will be to get industry to adopt HMF. Although it functions similarly to petroleum-based chemicals, it's still slightly different.
"Can the industry reconfigure to handle those slightly different properties?" he asked. "At the end of the day, it's all about cost."

Scientists may have underestimated how long it takes for CFCs to reach Antarctica's stratosphere and how long they stay there
Despite widespread international reductions in ozone destroying chemicals, the Antarctic ozone hole will probably continue its annual appearance for another 60 years, say atmospheric scientists, 20 years longer than previous estimates.
A new model that analyses the effects of ozone gobbling chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) emissions predicts a return to pre-1980 stratospheric ozone levels over the southern continent in 2068.
What's more, no meaningful shrinking of the ozone hole should be expected before 2024, say US researchers from NASA, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research in a recent issue of Geophysical Research Letters.
"The [previous] models underestimated the amount of chlorine and bromine over Antarctica," says NASA atmospheric scientist Dr Paul Newman, referring to the two elements that tear ozone apart. "That's why we underestimated the recovery rate."
One reason for earlier miscalculation is that CFC quantities over Antarctica were originally measured indirectly, by how much ozone destruction they caused. 
But when far more chlorine and bromine is present than needed to destroy all the ozone over Antarctica, it's difficult to predict the consequence of such a surplus.
Saturated with chlorine
In the 1990s the stratosphere over Antarctica saw the first of this sort of "saturation effect", says Newman, with 100% ozone destruction and plenty of chlorine and bromine to spare.
There can be no significant change in ozone destruction until the levels of harmful chemicals at least drop below the saturation level. The new model estimates that will happen by 2018, with a detectable reduction in ozone destruction by 2024.
"Now we understand how the models were wrong," Newman says.
Another change to the model comes from new information on how long it takes chlorine-containing CFCs to reach the Antarctic stratosphere and how long they linger, says atmospheric researcher Dr John Austin of NOAA's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory and the UK's Met Office.
"Over the last few years we've realised that it takes a lot longer for the chlorofluorocarbons to be taken out of the atmosphere," says Austin. The longer they linger, the slower the ozone recovers.
Yet another concern that has been raised in recent months is that the amounts of CFCs still being emitted hasn't dropped off as quickly as expected. That could possibly add more delays to ozone recovery at both poles.
"In principle you could have another delay of another couple of decades," says Austin. "You keep adding more and more delays and you're starting to look at another 30 years. That's a problem."

These dodo bones, found recently on the island of Mauritius, tell a different story of how these birds became extinct
Scientists who unearthed a mass dodo grave in Mauritius say they have found evidence showing a natural disaster killed the birds long before humans arrived on the Indian Ocean island.
Most theories about how the dodo became extinct blame early settlers who found the plump flightless bird in the 16th century and hunted it relentlessly. 
Now, researchers say there may have been additional reasons for the dodo's demise.
"There are indications that the fossil-rich layer represents the result of natural disaster wiping out a significant part of the dodo-ecotope," the researchers say.
While the latest find does not disprove the human theory, the scientists are convinced there was a mass dodo death, possibly caused by a cyclone or flood, pre-dating the arrival of humans, says Christian Foo Kune, of the sugar estate where the remains were found.
"The fact that there are such a wide range of animals there, small and big ones, suggests that there was a sudden natural disaster," he says. 
"The mass grave also shows no domestic animals, so it is prior to the arrival of man." 
The bones were thought to be at least 500 years old, he adds.
"We could be talking about a cyclone or repeated cyclones, flooding or a sudden rise in [sea] water levels that trapped the animals there," he says. 
The scientists from the Dodo Research Programme last month recovered a wealth of dodo remains and fossils of other animals and plants, including now-extinct Mauritian giant tortoises, parrots and tree seeds, from a sugar estate in the southeast. 
Researchers on the project say the fossils should enable them to reconstruct the dodo's world in the 10,000 years before humans found the bird and determine what caused it to die out. 
Foo Kune says that as the deaths at his site occurred before the final extinction of the dodo more than two centuries later, the scientists believe it does not rule out the idea that bird became extinct by human causes. 
Portuguese sailors first visited Mauritius in the 16th century, and Dutch settlers colonised it the following century, which is when the dodo died out.
Unused to predators, the dodos were not frightened of the human settlers who hunted it and destroyed the forests that provided its habitat.
Passing ships also brought rats, which ate the birds' eggs located in nests on the ground.

Details of the world's first partial face transplant have been published online in The Lancet journal. But ethical issues remain
The world's first partial face transplant, carried out by French doctors last November, has been acclaimed by the medical establishment as a historic achievement, although major risks remain unresolved. 
Controversy had swirled around the pioneering operation carried out by a team led by Professor Bernard Devauchelle in Amiens, northern France, with critics suggesting it was fraught with surgical and psychological peril. 
But, in a sign that the exploit has been accepted by the core of the medical community, Devauchelle provides a detailed account of the transplant procedure in the prestigious, peer-reviewed journal The Lancet. 
He also says that the patient's state, at the four-month mark, was fine.
"The technical feasibility of the procedure has been clearly demonstrated, with no surgical complication," says Devauchelle, whose paper is published online. 
"The functional result will be assessed in the future, but this graft can already be deemed successful with respect to appearance, sensitivity, and acceptance by the patient."
The patient, Isabelle Dinoire, 38, lost her nose, lips and right cheek after she was savaged by a dog.
On 27 November, a triangular-shaped part of the face of a 46-year-old woman, who was declared brain dead after suffering a severe stroke, was grafted on to Dinoire's face.
Thinking of rejection
Microsurgery was used to suture arteries, veins and motor nerves, and Dinoire was given immunosuppressant drugs aimed at thwarting rejecting of the transplanted organ.
She was also given two grafts of bone marrow, four days and 11 days after the transplant, to help produce white blood cells to fight off infection, a frequent consequence of taking immunosuppressors.
Bone-marrow transplants are themselves risky, sometimes causing life-threatening complications. 
One of the surgeons who took part was Professor Jean-Michel Dubernard, who carried out the world's hand-forearm transplant.
Two analyses of the operation, also published online by The Lancet, pay tribute to Devauchelle's work.
But they also raise questions over the longer term. 
German facial surgeon Dr Patrick Warnke of the University of Kiel hailed the operation as "a new milestone". 
But he warned, "failure of the [immunosuppressant] regimen chosen could prove devastating, with the possible loss of the transplanted face at any time". 
In addition, heavy use of these drugs also boosts the risk of cancer, meaning that a woman who before the operation was otherwise healthy despite her major handicap "is now at great risk", he says.
The ethics of transplants
Dr Edgardo Carosella of the St Louis Hospital in Paris and Thomas Pradeu of Sorbonne University says the ethical dilemma of a face transplant remain unresolved.
In the case of the first hand transplant, the recipient, New Zealander Clint Hallam began to view the organ as alien, stopped taking immunosuppressant drugs and eventually begged, successfully, for the hand to be amputated.
"Every graft of a visible organ leads to an identity split, the consequences of which can be very serious if the recipient does not succeed in psychologically accepting the organ and in rebuilding its social expression in everyday life," say Carosella and Pradeu.
These and other issues are being mulled by UK medical watchdogs as they vet an application by London surgeons to carry out the world's first full-face transplant.

Professor Hwang Woo-suk arrives for trial to face charges of fraud and embezzlement
Disgraced stem-cell scientist Professor Hwang Woo-suk has admitted to fabricating some data that went into a landmark paper but says he was duped by junior researchers into believing the bulk of his team's findings were valid. 
Hwang, once celebrated as a national hero, was indicted in May after prosecutors said he was the mastermind of an elaborate scheme to make it look like his team had produced stem cell lines through cloning human embryos. 
"I admit to the suspicion of fabrication," he said in court as prosecutors questioned whether he personally altered parts of data for a 2005 paper to make it appear as if the team had made more stem cell lines then they had actually produced.
"It was clearly my wrongdoing, I admit it." 
Hwang has apologised previously for the discredited papers but this week offered the most detailed account of his role in data manipulations that led to the team's downfall. 
He admitted to altering a data sheet given to him by a team member to make it look like a stem cell line had been created in one experiment before the data was given to a US researcher helping to write the paper. 
Hwang also said he knew his team did not produce as many stem lines as they had claimed. 
He said he accepted responsibility for a discredited study on developing patient-specific embryonic stem cells that was published in the US journal  Science.
A separate investigation panel that debunked Hwang's papers questioned whether the team had produced any stem cell lines.
Others implicated 
He said he was unaware of much larger fabrications in data provided by some junior researchers. 
"I believed the test results brought to me by researchers that supported the findings in the papers," Hwang said. "Not all the responsibility for the fabrications lies with me."
Hwang also denied he broke a bioethics law but said his team did pay for human eggs that had been donated for his study. 
Prosecutors have charged Hwang with misusing and embezzling the equivalent of US$2.96 million (A$3.98) in state funds and private donations as well as fraud and violating bioethics laws in procuring human eggs for his research. 
Misuse of state funds carries a penalty of up to 10 years' jail, while violating the bioethics law can lead to three years' imprisonment, prosecutors say.
Emotional testimony
Hwang spoke with mounting emotion as he answered questions about the integrity of the science in his team's work. 
"We still want to believe the veracity of the stem cell lines, which we hope will be verified by a world-renowned lab, not some incompetent committee from Seoul National University," Hwang said. 
An investigation panel at Seoul National University, where Hwang once worked, said in a report in January that Hwang's team deliberately falsified key data in two papers on embryonic stem cells that have since been retracted by Science. 
In a 2004 paper, Hwang's team said it had developed stem cells from a cloned human embryo and in a 2005 paper said it had produced tailored embryonic stem cells. 
The reported breakthroughs had raised hopes because they seemed to hasten the day when genetically specific tissue could be grown from embryonic stem cells to repair damaged organs or treat diseases such as Alzheimer's.

Vascular disease may be associated with particular types of migraine
Adults who suffer from bouts of migraine without aura have slightly narrower retinal blood vessels than adults without migraine, Australian research shows.
The finding supports the hypothesis that microvascular disease may be associated with certain types of migraine, investigators note.
They publish their report in the journal Headache, a journal of the American Headache Society.
Dr Gerald Liew from the University of Sydney and colleagues took photographs of people's retinas as part of the Blue Mountains Eye Study.
The researchers measured the diameters of blood vessels in 2335 people over the age of 54 who took part in the population-based cohort study.
People with a history of migraine without aura had narrower retinal blood vessels, or arterioles, than those with a history of migraine with aura or people with no history of migraine. 
The findings held up in analyses adjusting for potentially confounding factors, the researchers say.

Gooooal!
A German scientist has used nanotechnology to create what he believes is the world's smallest soccer pitch.
Dr Stefan Trellenkamp, from the University of Kaiserslautern, made the pitch by using an electron beam to engrave lines onto a tiny piece of acrylic glass.
The pitch measures 380 by 500 nanometres and can only be seen through an electron microscope.
"I am really, really proud," the nanotechnology researcher says.
"The only problem is that I really don't know what to do with it. I can't put it on show as no one can see it," he says. "I guess it'll just stay in my drawer for the time being." 
Trellenkamp says it took him a whole day to etch the pitch, which is so small that 20,000 of them could fit onto the tip of a human hair.

A koala retrovirus is integrated into the koala genome and its genetic material is passed from parent to offspring
A cancer-causing virus is gradually invading the genome of Australia's koalas, researchers say.
Rachael Tarlinton, a PhD student from the University of Queensland, and colleagues made the unexpected discovery while studying koala retrovirus (KoRV), which causes leukaemia and immune deficiencies.
Until now, scientists had thought KoRV was an endogenous virus, a virus that has become integrated into its host's genome and passed from parent to child like normal genes.
But when Tarlinton and her colleagues examined the virus in koalas throughout Australia they found that some populations were infected with the virus and others were free of it.
Their findings are published today in the journal Nature.
The researchers also found that KoRV is highly active and variable between individual koalas, suggesting it is in transition between infectious and endogenous forms.
"That was the real surprise," says co-author Associate Professor Paul Young. "That just totally changes what we think about endogenous retroviruses."
Endogenous viruses are found throughout the animal kingdom, including in humans, but have normally been integrated into their host genomes for thousands of years.
Island life
When the researchers studied koalas on Kangaroo Island, off the south coast of Australia, they found that the marsupials were completely free of the virus.
The population on that island was established around 1900 when koalas on the mainland were being killed by hunting.
Together with other evolutionary evidence, this suggests that KoRV probably began invading the koala genome between 100 and 200 years ago, Young says.
Early studies, he says, suggest the virus might have come from Asian rodents.
"We've had incursions from Asian rodents into northern Australia repeatedly over thousands of years," he says. "We think that's probably the route."
Causing cancer
Because the virus has only recently begun integrating into the koala genome, it still often causes cancers, the researchers note.
"The koala is having to live with the high levels of cancers ... and there's not a lot we can do about that in the wild," Young says.
For the scientists, the new findings offer a rare glimpse into what happens when an animal is faced with a viral challenge like this.
"Coming to grips with how the koala handles this initial viral onslaught may give us insights into the dynamic events that occurred millions of years ago when retroviruses first invaded the human genome," Young says.

Who's that?
Monkeys recognise each other by comparing faces to an average stored in their brains, not by memorising what every monkey looks like, scientists say.
And that probably also goes for people, explaining how humans can recognise faces in a fraction of a second, according to a study published online in the journal Nature today. 
The scientists found that a monkey's brain did not keep track of different parts of a face, storing and then accessing the information to recognise others. 
Instead it keeps a statistical average of the faces it has seen and uses it as a basis for comparison. 
"When it sees a new face it compares it to this average and then it remarks upon the differences ... and that is how the face is seen," says Dr David Leopold, of the US National Institute of Mental Health. 
"It elucidates how it is possible that you can so quickly and effortlessly, in just a few hundred milliseconds, recognise faces."
Leopold and his colleagues pinpointed the recognition system while studying neurones in an area of the brain called the inferotemporal cortex in two macaque monkeys.
The monkeys had been trained to recognise computer-generated human faces. 
The scientists monitored single neurones to understand how groups of the brain cells work together to recognise faces. 
"What we found is that the neurones in this part of the monkey's brain respond in a way that is extremely sensitive to the small differences in information between faces of different identities," says Leopold.
Average face
The activity of the neurones was monitored as the monkeys were shown an average face of a person and as it was artificially morphed to the full identity. 
"The main finding was a striking tendency for neurones to show tuning that appeared centred about the average face," Leopold says.
In psychological tests, humans identify faces in much the same way as monkeys so the researchers believe this aspect of the visual recognition system is similar in both species. 
The results suggest that monkeys, and possibly humans, are primed to recognise minute facial changes.
Facial expression is an indicator of emotion and intent, which could be crucial for survival.

The star shield approaches the line of sight to the parent star. At this stage, the bright starlight swamps the planet light in the telescope. But if the shield blocks most of the starlight, planets may be easier to find
A huge daisy-shaped shield that would block out light from parent stars could be used to find Earth-like planets in other solar systems, a US astronomer says.
He and his team have designed a plastic 'starshade' measuring 45 metres in diameter that would orbit with a trailing telescope.
The shield would block out light from parent stars, which would normally swamp light reflected from their planets, to enable scientists to map planetary systems. 
Finding other planets is very difficult because their parent stars are about 10 times brighter. 
"We think this is a compelling concept, particularly because it can be built today with existing technology," says Professor Webster Cash of the University of Colorado, who outlines his proposal today in the journal Nature.
"We will be able to study Earth-like planets tens of trillions of miles away and chemically analyse their atmospheres for signs of life," he adds.
The shield, which is known as the New Worlds Observer, would be launched into an orbit about 1 trillion miles from Earth and then opened. 
Three thrusters would be used to keep it steady while the telescope trailing thousands of kilometres behind follows light from distant planets as it hits the space shield. 
"The New Worlds Observer is actively being studied in academia, industry and government," Cash says. 
He adds that if Earth-like planets exist, the starshade could find them within the next decade.
One day, a ring of telescopes might be placed on the Moon with a fleet of orbiting starshades, Cash says. This would allow scientists to photograph distant planets.

DVDs coated with a light-sensitive protein may be able to store 50 terabytes (about 50,000 gigabytes) of data
DVDs coated with a layer of protein could one day hold so much information that storing data on your computer hard drive will be obsolete, says a US-based researcher.
He says that the protein layer, made from tiny genetically altered microbe proteins, could allow DVDs and other external devices to store terabytes of information.
Professor V Renugopalakrishnan of the  Harvard Medical School in Boston reported his findings at the International Conference on Nanoscience and Nanotechnology in Brisbane this week.
"What this will do eventually is eliminate the need for hard drive memory completely," he says.
Renugopalakrishnan says high-capacity storage devices like the new protein-based DVDs will be essential to the defence, medical and entertainment industries.
These trade in terabytes of information with the transfer of information such as satellite images, imaging scans and movies.
"You have a compelling need that is not going to be met with the existing magnetic storage technology," he says.
Renugopalakrishnan says the new protein-based DVD will have advantages over current optical storage devices (such as the Blue-ray).
It will be able to store at least 20 times more than the Blue-ray and eventually even up to 50,000 gigabytes (about 50 terabytes) of information, he says.
The star at the centre of the high-capacity DVD is a light-activated protein found in the membrane of a salt marsh microbe Halobacterium salinarum.  
The protein, called bacteriorhodopsin (bR), captures and stores sunlight to convert it to chemical energy.
When light shines on bR, it is converted to a series of intermediate molecules each with a unique shape and colour before returning to its 'ground state'.
The intermediates generally only last for hours or days. 
But Renugopalakrishnan and colleagues modified the DNA that produces bR protein to produce an intermediate that lasts for more than several years, which paves the way for a binary system to store data.
"The ground state could be the zero and any of the intermediates could be the one," he says.
The scientists also engineered the bR protein to make its intermediates more stable at the high temperatures generated by storing terabytes of data.
The flip side
Renugopalakrishnan says making large amounts of information so portable on high-capacity removable storage devices will make it easier for information to fall into the wrong hands.
"Unfortunately science can be used and abused. Information can be stolen very quickly," he says. "One has to have some safeguards there."
In conjunction with NEC in Japan, Renugopalakrishnan's team has produced a prototype device and estimate a USB disk will be commercialised in 12 months and a DVD in 18 to 24 months.
The work has been funded by a range of US military, government, academic institutions and commercial companies, as well as the European Union.

The telescope, a prototype of which is seen here, will use tiles to gather radio waves from the early universe
An innovative radio telescope made up of square tiles instead of conventional dish antennas will be built in outback Western Australia to study what switched on the first stars.
The Mileura Widefield Array, which will cover an area 1.5 kilometres in diameter, will use 500 six metre square 'tiles' to gather radio signals from its site in the mid-west of the state.
The array will operate at low frequencies to 'see through' the neutral hydrogen, which is opaque to optical light, that filled the early universe.
"Less than a billion years after the Big Bang something happened to ionise the neutral hydrogen so that the universe became transparent as it is today," says Dr Brian Boyle, director of CSIRO's Australia Telescope National Facility.
"The question is what? Was it massive stars, quasars, black holes?  We don't know. But by looking at the primordial constituents of the gas and how it has been ionised we will be able to derive some important limits." 
The array is being built by Australian and US partners as part of the preparation for the Square Kilometre Array (SKA), a huge international radio telescope scheduled for operation in 2020.
"The SKA will require a number of different front-end antennas to cover a wide frequency range," says Boyle, and the Mileura array will cover the low-frequency range.
Mileura, a uniquely radio-quiet area, is Australia's proposed base site for the SKA, which, if successful, will include antennas as far afield as New Zealand.
The Mileura array will operate at similar wavelengths used for FM radio and television. So, if it was built near a big city, signals would swamp radio signals from space.
Computer power
Computing power lies at the heart of the array, which will use modern digital signal processing and clever electronics to turn thousands of small, cheap, fixed dipole antennas into one of the most powerful astronomical instruments in the world.
The signals or data from each of the antennas can be combined in different ways, effectively allowing the telescope to 'point' in any direction although no moving parts are required.
Until recently, combining and analysing signals collected from multiple antennas, known as interferometry, took time as the recorded data had to be processed centrally.
With the Mileura array a supercomputer will process the data instantly, in real time.
CSIRO has invested A$20 million overall and the US National Science Foundation has awarded Massachusetts Institute of Technology US$4.9 million for the construction of the Mileura array which will begin in 2008.
Other Australian partners include a university consortium led by the University of Melbourne, which includes the Australian National University and Curtin University of Technology.

The new combustor injects fuel and air separately into the chamber through devices that look like drinking straws
The developers of a new combustion chamber that uses a simple and inexpensive design to burn fossil fuels say it emits almost no nitrogen oxide, a big contributor of smog and acid rain.
The combustor, developed by Assistant Professor Ben Zinn and his team at the Georgia Institute of Technology, is not suitable for the ever-fluctuating environment of a car's engine. 
But it could replace the steady-state combustion chambers of industry and power generation, which the US Environmental Protection Agency says spews more than half of all energy-related emissions into the atmosphere. 
Until now, developing a low-emission combustor has proven challenging for a couple of big reasons.
For fuel to burn, it must be mixed with air. Conventional combustors premix the air with the fuel and inject the mixture into the bottom of a tube-shaped chamber.
Inside the chamber, the molecules are set aflame at temperatures over 1800&deg;K. At those temperatures, the air molecules break down and their two main elements, nitrogen and oxygen, begin to react and form nitrous oxide and carbon monoxide.
Before the new molecules can be burned, they escape through the top of the tube as emissions. Premixed fuel can also cause flames to flash back, burning the fuel nozzle.
Engineers have tried several strategies for reducing flashback and emissions, among them burning the fuel mixture at temperatures lower than 1800&deg;K. But the lower the temperature the weaker the flame and the more likely that it will experience 'blow out'.
"It's like having a very weak candle flame. Every time there is a breeze, it blows out. It's not very robust," says Zinn. "In our system, we can go to the lower temps without losing the flame."
The new device, called a stagnation point reverse flow combustor, is robust because of its fairly simple design, say its developers.
Instead of being tube-shaped, it is designed more like a drinking glass - open on the top and sealed on the bottom.
Over the top of the chamber is a special injector that looks like a skinny straw inserted into a fat straw.
Fuel flows through the skinny straw down into the chamber; air flows into the chamber through the fat straw.
The ingredients move down the centre of the chamber, mix, ignite and burn in a low-temperature flame.
Once they reach the bottom of the chamber, the molecules move to the wall of the chamber and begin to rise in an attempt to escape.
But on their way back up, they come into contact and ignite the mixture of fuel coming down.
"Ben Zinn is one of our country's best combustion scientists," says Richard Dennis, turbine technology manager at the US Department of Energy's National Energy Technology Laboratory.
"He seems to get around two big issues: the premixing issue of fuels and air and the [flashback] issue. And he seems to do this in a simple geometry."
According to Zinn, when the combustion process occurs stably at temperatures below 1800&deg;K, only one nitrous oxide molecule in one million escapes to the environment.
Before such technology could make it to market, though, it will have to be rigorously tested.
"Ben needs to produce more data that validates the performance and does it at conditions that are relevant to the application," says Dennis.
Zinn thinks that in about a year, he could have the device working on residential water heaters or industrial boilers. 
It would take several more years, but the combustor could one day be incorporated into gas turbines for power generation and even into aeroplane engines, he says.

Current tests for BSE need brain or other tissue samples. But new research suggests that BSE leaves its mark in the blood, paving the way for a blood test
Tests in hamsters suggest it may be possible to develop a blood test for mad cow and related diseases in both humans and animals before they develop symptoms, researchers report. 
The study, published in the journal Science, also suggests that the damaged brain cells may 'leak' the infectious prions that cause the diseases, offering a chance to detect the disease in blood. 
Such a test would allow animals to be checked before they enter the food supply.
It could also screen people, including blood or organ donors, for the rare but devastating Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease or CJD, and its close cousin, vCJD, the researchers say. 
Current tests require brain or other tissue samples. 
Mad cow disease, formally known as bovine spongiform encephalopathy or BSE, is part of the family of prion diseases that also includes scrapie in sheep, chronic wasting disease in deer and elk, and CJD in people. 
BSE emerged in Britain in the 1980s and swept through dairy herds. Some people who ate infected beef products developed a form of CJD called variant or vCJD and at least 191 cases have been identified, mostly in the UK. 
People can have CJD before they know it and in a few suspected cases, blood and organ donors may have unwittingly infected others. 
Silent phase
Professor Claudio Soto of the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston and colleagues infected hamsters with prions, the misfolded nerve proteins believed to cause the diseases, and then tested blood at various times. 
They invented a technique known as protein misfolding cyclic amplification to accelerate the process by which prions convert normal proteins to misshapen infectious forms. 
"With this method, for the first time we have detected prions in what we call the silent phase of infection, which in humans can last up to 40 years," Soto says. 
Soto and his university have formed a company, called Amprion, to commercially develop the test. 
Timing is crucial
The test may need to be used at precise times, the researchers say. It worked best in hamsters 40 days after infection. It did not detect prions 80 days after infection. 
Then at 114 days, after the hamsters started showing symptoms, the blood test again revealed prions.
"It has been reported that large quantities of [infectious prions] appear in the brain only a few weeks before the onset of clinical signs," the researchers write. 
Heart disease
A second study in Science shows that mice infected with prions develop heart disease similar to a type known as amyloid heart disease in people.
Dr Bruce Chesebro of the National Institutes of Health and colleagues say these diseases are marked by waxy protein deposits that stiffen the heart, limit its pumping ability and typically lead to fatal heart stoppage. 
"Although several types of protein are known to form heart amyloid, this is the first time prion protein amyloid has been found in heart muscle and also found to cause heart malfunction," Chesebro says.

The plan is to use magnets to attract iron oxide nanoparticles attached to genes
Magnets may one day drag genes around the body in a novel form of gene therapy, says a Swiss scientist.
The magnets would be attracted to iron oxide nanoparticles attached to the genes, a concept that has been tested in sheep.
But many safety tests would be needed before this technology could be used in humans, says Professor Heinrich Hofmann of the
Ecole Polytechnique Fdrale de Lausanne in Switzerland.
Hofmann reported his findings at the International Conference on Nanoscience and Nanotechnology in Brisbane last week.
Gene therapy has been beset with problems including the lack of a safe and effective vector to transport therapeutic genes into cells.
Hofmann says his iron oxide nanoparticles are safer than commonly used viral vectors, which can mutate and influence the DNA of cells.
"The iron oxide particle is less dangerous than a virus," he says.
He also says the nanoparticles can be controlled more precisely than a virus because they can be moved into place with a magnet.
In a recent experiment, Hofmann injected iron nanoparticles attached to a green fluorescent protein gene into the joint of sheep and used a magnet to move the gene into place.
The sheep cells produced green fluorescent protein that glowed green under light, proving the success of the experiment, Hoffman says.
The research has been published in the Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials.
Activating stem cells
In another application, Hofmann is using magnets and iron oxide nanoparticles to activate the growth of bone stem cells.
In vitro experiments have shown that iron oxide nanoparticles injected into stem cells can be vibrated with magnets to boost cell growth.
"We know from a fracture that if you mechanically stimulate the bone then the growth is enhanced," he says. "The healing rate is improved. And we are now doing this on a cellular level."
This work is being patented and is yet to be published.
Safety issues
Iron oxide nanoparticles are approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for use in magnetic resonance imaging, says Hoffman. 
But these particles have different coatings not designed to penetrate cells, and are cleared via the blood into the liver.
The iron oxide nanoparticles Hofmann uses have a coating of polymers and specific chemical groups designed to help them penetrate cells. 
Because of this, and because the safety of nanoparticles in general is still being investigated, Hofmann says his laboratory is careful to contain the nanoparticles to prevent them from escaping.
He says after doing their job, the nanoparticles would be cleared through the lymphatic system into the kidney where they would gradually be cleared from the body.
But, he says, there is a risk the nanoparticles could create local inflammation or toxic shock.
Another danger is they could clump together and clog up the kidney, says Hoffman, and many more safety tests are required.
Hofmann's research is publicly funded.

Differences in levels of gene expression between men and women may help to explain why they respond differently to drugs and diseases
Thousands of genes behave differently in the same organs of males and females, researchers report, a finding that may help explain why men and women have different responses to drugs and diseases. 
Their study of brain, liver, fat and muscle tissue from mice show that gene expression, the level of activity of a gene, varies greatly according to sex. 
The same is almost certainly true of humans, the team at the University of California Los Angeles report. 
"This research holds important implications for understanding disorders such as diabetes, heart disease and obesity, and identifies targets for the development of gender-specific therapies," says Jake Lusis, a professor of human genetics who worked on the study.
Writing in the August issue of the journal Genome Research, the researchers say that even in the same organ, scores of genes vary in expression levels between the sexes.
The smallest differences are in brain tissue.
"We saw striking and measurable differences in more than half of the genes' expression patterns between males and females," says Dr Thomas Drake, a professor of pathology.
"We didn't expect that. No one has previously demonstrated this genetic gender gap at such high levels." 
Xia Yang, a postdoctoral fellow in cardiology who led the study, says the implications are important.
"Males and females share the same genetic code, but our findings imply that gender regulates how quickly the body can convert DNA to proteins," Yang says. "This suggests that gender influences how disease develops." 
In liver tissue, the findings imply male and female livers function the same, but at different rates. 
"Our findings in the liver may explain why men and women respond differently to the same drug," Lusis says. 
"Studies show that aspirin is more effective at preventing heart attack in men than women. One gender may metabolise the drug faster, leaving too little of the medication in the system to produce an effect." 
Yang adds: "Many of the genes we identified relate to processes that influence common diseases. This is crucial, because once we understand the gender gap in these disease mechanisms, we can create new strategies for designing and testing new sex-specific drugs.

The active ingredient in magic mushrooms produces spiritual experiences identical to those reported through history
The active ingredient in hallucinogenic mushrooms produces a spiritual experience that can have lasting positive effects, a trial has shown.
The ingredient, psilocybin, increases wellbeing and satisfaction with life two months after being taken, according to the research by scientists at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, which is published online today in the journal Psychopharmacology.
Psilocybin is a plant alkaloid that affects the brain's serotonin system, in particular, the 5-HT2A receptor.
"Under very defined conditions, with careful preparation, you can safely and fairly reliably occasion what's called a primary mystical experience that may lead to positive changes in a person," study leader Professor Roland Griffiths says.
Australian professor of psychopharmacology at the University of Sydney, Ian McGregor, says he isn't surprised that the study confirms the ability of psilocybin to induce a spiritual state.
"Psilocybin and related hallucinogens have been used since ancient times in religious rituals and this study is really formalising ... what many people already know," he says.
But he says the apparent long-term benefit of the drug is "remarkable".
