Nanoparticles are extremely tiny, a nanometer, or a billionth of a metre, or less in diameter. 
Dr Richard Crowder of the School of Electronics and Computer Science at the University of Southampton in the UK says the development of tactile sensors is one of the key technical challenges in advanced robotics and minimally invasive surgery.
"The unique sensor developed by Maheshwari and Saraf could prove to be a key advance in technology, for reasons including relatively simple construction, apparent robustness, and high resolution," he says in an accompanying editorial in Science.

Researchers say they've cured bubble boy disease in dogs and this has implications for humans with the genetic abnormality(Image: iStockphoto)
A new treatment has cured basset hounds with bubble boy disease, a life-threatening genetic disorder that disables the immune system, according to a recent study.
The disease, called X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (XSCID), affects male dogs and around 1 in 100,000 boys, all of whom inherit a faulty gene from one of their mother's X-chromosomes.
The dog study suggests the new treatment may become available to people in future.
At present, there is only one treatment for the disease, which was brought to the public's attention in a popular 1976 film called The Boy in the Plastic Bubble, starring John Travolta.
He played David Vetter, a young man who spent his entire life in a sterilised environment. The real-life Vetter died in 1984.
New approaches
Boys diagnosed with the condition are given bone-marrow transplants that can replenish stem cells responsible for renewing new functional immune cells.
Gene therapy, in which the individual's own bone marrow cells are cultured in a lab with the normal gene, showed some success in treating 10 of 11 boys during a 1999 French study.
But three of the test subjects later developed leukaemia related to the process.
"Although ex-vivo (outside of the body) gene therapy has been shown to be capable of restoring normal immune function in XSCID boys, there are several potential problems with this approach," says Dr Peter J. Felsburg, who led the recent work and is a professor of immunology at the University of Pennsylvania 's School of Veterinary Medicine.
Felsburg and his colleagues tried a new approach by directly injecting the corrected gene via an engineered virus into the bloodstream of four "bubble boy" basset hounds.
Three of the four dogs have maintained healthy immune systems over a year after receiving the genes.
The fourth dog received a lower dosage, which suggests there is a lower limit to the dose before the gene can restore immunity.
The findings were published recently in the journal Blood.
Too early to say it's safe
Jennifer Puck, who is a researcher in the Division of Immunology and Rheumatology at the University of California, San Francisco, is a leading expert on XSCID and related immunodeficiency diseases.
At the April conference Primary Immunodeficiencies: Past, Present, Future, Puck presented information on a new method she and her colleagues have developed for diagnosing the diseases in young infants.
Puck says the basset hound treatment "is a great idea, but its application to humans is far in the future. It is still way too early to say that it is safe."
She explained that the French children who developed leukaemia did not become ill until 30-34 months after the treatment.
Puck, however, welcomes new methods for curing immunodeficiency diseases, which can affect both boys and girls. XSCID, which only affects boys, is just one of many related conditions.
"Newborns affected with severe immunodeficiency look completely healthy at first because they have antibodies from their mother," Puck says.
"Unfortunately, something really serious has to happen before the genetic disease is suspected, but by then, the baby often is not in good shape."
She hopes universal screening soon will look for the diseases in all babies when they have their blood tests shortly after birth.

Stargazers hope to learn more about Pluto and its moons during the occultation
Earth and Pluto will move exactly in line with a star in a rare astronomical event known as an occultation.
Occultations occur when one celestial body moves in front of another, hiding it from view.
The event, during which a faint star catalogued as UCAC 2603 9859 will be occulted by Pluto, will occur at 02:25 AEST on 13 June (16:25 12 June UTC) and will last less than two minutes.
Teams of astronomers have travelled from around the world to view the occultation.
The main visibility areas will be in New Zealand and southern Australia.
Amateur astronomers with large telescopes will also be attempting to view the occultation, good weather conditions permitting. 
The shadow cast by Pluto, the smallest and most distant planet in the solar system, as it tracks across the Earth is only 2,300 kilometres wide - the same as its diameter.
Learning more about Pluto
The occultation will help explain some of the mysteries of Pluto's nitrogen atmosphere and whether it has a system of rings similar to Saturn, astronomers say.
It also offers one of only a few opportunities to obtain data to fine-tune experiments on NASA's New Horizons space mission due to reach Pluto in 2015.
Dr Mark Buie, from Lowell Observatory in the US and a leading authority on occultations, says the occultation could provide new insights into conditions on Pluto.
"If the planet had no atmosphere, when it moved in front of the star the star would disappear instantly," he says.
"But an atmosphere refracts the light a little - it gets spread out, so we see the star get gradually fainter as it goes behind Pluto.
"The signature of that light curve, how it diminishes with time, allows us to measure fundamental properties of the atmosphere - what it's made of, its temperature and how extensive it is."
New Zealand observations of a Pluto occultation in 1988 first confirmed that Pluto had an atmosphere and new data will give scientists an idea about what happens to Pluto's atmosphere as it gets further from the sun. 
"We've only seen Pluto through a quarter of one orbit," says Buie, "and some models predict that the atmosphere will freeze right out. We'd like to test that." 
The event is even more significant because of the recent discovery of two new satellites to add to Pluto's moon Charon. 
"That would be fantastically exciting because it would give us a shot at constraining their size," Buie says.
Detailed information about the occultation can be found here.

Hormonal changes linked to the seasons may change the shape of your body during the year
Seasonal changes cause fat to shift locations in our body, altering the shape of our figures at certain times of the year, according to a new study.
Varying testosterone levels drive the shape changes, the study, which has been accepted for publication in the upcoming issue of  Psychoneuroendocrinology suggests.
 The hormone, often associated with brawn and aggressiveness, fluctuates over the seasons in both men and women.
The most evident changes occur around the waist and hip region, the study says. When testosterone levels rise, women became less curvy and fat shifts toward the waist.
Other research has determined that the opposite happens in men, who retain more fat in the abdominal region when testosterone levels fall.
The scientists examined seasonal testosterone fluctuations in the saliva of 220 women and 127 men. They also measured the waists and hips of the female study participants over the seasons.
Women more curvaceous in winter
"We found that women's and men's testosterone is highest in autumn," says Sari van Anders, a PhD student at Canada's Simon Fraser University who led the research.
"As well, women's waist-to-hip ratio (how big the waist is relative to the hips) is highest during autumn, and central measures of fat deposition, like abdominal fat, were also somewhat higher in autumn (for women)."
Women also had high testosterone levels in summer. Men showed lowest testosterone levels in spring.
Van Anders, a doctoral candidate in behavioural neuroendocrinology, says "This suggests that patterns of fat deposition, but not overall fat, are slightly different depending on the season, with more fat being deposited in the central waist region in autumn (in women)".
The study suggests women look more curvaceous in winter and spring.
Men, Van Anders says, look manlier during spring when waist and hip size becomes more uniform and less feminine.
"While we didn't test this, a large body of previous research has found that men find lower waist-to-hip ratios in women more attractive in Western nations," van Anders says.
"As well, a large body of research finds that lower waist-to-hip ratios are associated with better fertility parameters and health parameters. This suggests that women should be perceived as slightly less attractive in autumn."
The researchers don't know whether the changes are apparent on a conscious or subconscious level, since they occur gradually over time and do not dramatically alter appearance.
It's all about reproduction
Randy Nelson, a professor of psychology and neuroscience at Ohio State University, and one of the world's leading experts on how the seasons affect humans and animals, says the study "is a novel and important finding".
"There have been previous demonstrations of seasonal changes in hormones, including testosterone, in humans, as well as seasonal influences on the timing of conception," he says.
"About 6 years ago, a graduate student of mine even showed seasonal changes in cognitive performance among people!"
The scientists are not sure why these fluctuations in body shape exist.
Van Anders says the changes might be byproducts of testosterone changing seasonally for reasons unrelated to waist-to-hip ratio, such as health, immune function, fertility and behaviour.

A vacuum-based robot could climb tall buildings more efficiently than those with suction caps and claws, its designer says
A wall-climbing robot could replace people in building inspections and one day survey urban war zones, where corners, rooftops and building materials thwart otherwise capable robots.
The City Climber rover, being developed by Professor Jizhong Xiao and his team at the City College of New York, uses a vacuum chamber to get vertical.
The robot is part of a project that aims to automate mandatory building inspections.
"New York City mandates that the facades of buildings be inspected every five years," says Xiao.
"But the current manual inspection is time-consuming and the cost is very high."
Xiao thinks his robot can do the job faster, cheaper, and more thoroughly than trained technicians, who typically perform their gravity-defying work from suspended scaffolding.
Conventional robotic wall climbers typically employ more superhero-like methods: sticky feet, suction cups, claws, or magnets.
But those grippers are only as good as the surface they make contact with.
Suction cups or sticky feet, for example, work best on smooth surfaces such as glass or marble, but not so well on brick.
Clawed toes clamber well over rock and brick but slip on glass.
What's more, such devices tend to move tentatively and cannot navigate over a variety of textured surfaces.
Vacuum technology
Getting a robot to both cling to a wall and maneuver effortlessly over it are among the two biggest challenges that face researchers focused on wall-climbing robots, says Professor Ning Xi, director of the Laboratory of Robotics and Automation at Michigan State University.
"In both aspects, the City Climber is probably the best in the world right now," says Xi, who is not associated with the project.
The one kilogram device clings to the wall by way of a vacuum rotor located in the centre of its underbelly.
The rotor's impeller draws air in from the centre of the device and spews it out toward the edges.
The column of circulating air creates a region of low air pressure inside the vacuum chamber. Because the surrounding air pressure is higher, it pushes down on the device, keeping it tight to the wall.
Small wheels on the underbelly of the device drive the robot forward and back.
By linking two triangular-shaped modules with a hinged arm, the researchers were able to make the City Climber manoeuver around 90 degree angle corners and transition from a wall to a roof, all with the strength to pull or carry a payload four times its weight.
"They have achieved one of the highest payloads reported in the literature," says
Professor Nikos Papanikolopoulos of the University of Minnesota.
Xiao plans to equip his rover with a high-resolution digital camera.

The good news is that beer may prevent prostate cancer. The bad news is that you'll destroy your liver if you drink enough to have any effect
One of the main ingredients in beer appears to thwart prostate cancer, according to findings released by US researchers.
But you would have to quaff more than 17 pints to imbibe a medically effective dose of xanthohumol, the apparently cancer-fighting antioxidant found in hops,  says researcher Emily Ho.
"From my studies, you would have to drink an awful lot of beer," says Ho, assistant professor of health and human science at Oregon State University.
"So the counter effects of the alcohol may outweigh any health benefits from drinking beer." 
Co-author Fred Stevens of the university's College of Pharmacy, says it's feasible to make pills containing concentrated doses of xanthohumol or to bump up the level of the chemical in hops.
Scientists in Germany have already brewed up a beer containing ten times as much xanthohumol as found in traditional recipes, Stevens says.
The brew is being marketed in Germany as a healthy beer, but any effect on cancer rates is yet to be shown, he says.
Beer and pizza
Richard Atkins, head of the US National Prostate Cancer Coalition, says tomato sauce is also believed to be an effective cancer fighter.
This means that beer and pizza could be a winning anti-cancer formula.
"It's every man's dream to hear that beer and pizza can prevent cancer," he says.
"Bur our hope is that men know the facts and get tested for prostate cancer. Food no matter how helpful it may be is not a full preventive for prostate cancer." 
While the research regarding xanthohumol is promising, Ho cautions that further study is necessary. 
"The one caveat is that all our work is done in a laboratory system using cultured cells with purified compounds," she says.
Now for more good news
Meanwhile, a separate study has found that drinking coffee may help prevent the liver disease alcoholic cirrhosis. 
The study of more than 125,000 people found that for each cup of coffee they drank per day, participants were 22&nbsp;% less likely to develop alcoholic cirrhosis.
"These data support the hypothesis that there is an ingredient in coffee that protects against cirrhosis, especially alcoholic cirrhosis," concludes the report from the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program in Oakland.
The authors said they could not determine whether it was caffeine or another ingredient in coffee which had the protective effect.
The study is published in the American Medical Association's Archives of Internal Medicine.
The authors say the findings don't suggest heavy drinkers should rely on coffee to prevent alcoholic cirrhosis.
"Even if coffee is protective, the primary approach to reduction of alcoholic cirrhosis is avoidance or cessation of heavy alcohol drinking," they say.

The findings do not preclude the possibility of increased risk of suicide among small populations of individuals, the researchers say
Newer antidepressant drugs may not raise the risk of suicide as previously suggested, say researchers, who document a drop in suicide rates in the US since the drugs were introduced.
Dr Julio Licinio of the University of Miami and colleagues report in the June issue of the journal Public Library of Science Medicine that the new SSRI antidepressants could have saved more than 30,000 lives. 
"Our findings certainly suggest that the introduction of SSRIs has contributed to reduction of suicide rates in the United States," says Licinio who did the study while at the University of California Los Angeles.
"However, the findings do not preclude the possibility of increased risk of suicide among small populations of individuals." 
Millions of people use SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), including Pfizer's Zoloft, GlaxoSmithKline's Paxil and the first drug of this type, Eli Lilly's Prozac, or fluoxetine.
Warnings
The US Food and Drug Administration introduced "black box warnings" on the most popular SSRIs in 2004 after studies in the US and Britain suggested the drugs may raise the risk of suicidality in children and adults.
"Although the current issue concerning antidepressants and suicidality requires further examination, we believe that many more lives have been saved than lost since the advent of these drugs," say Licinio and team. 
Suicidality is defined by feelings, thoughts, and behaviours related to suicide, but the researchers say actual deaths caused by suicide are a better measure of whether there is a benefit from antidepressants.
Licinio's team studied federal data to show the US suicide rate held steady for 15 years prior to the introduction of Prozac in 1988, then dropped steadily over 14 years as sales of the antidepressant rose. The research team found the strongest effect among women. 
Mathematical modelling of probable suicide rates from 1988 to 2002, based on pre-1988 data, suggests 33,600 fewer people have committed suicide since Prozac hit the market, Licinio says.
The actual suicide rates fluctuated between 12.2 and 13.7 suicides per 100,000 people until 1988, and then gradually fell to the lowest 10.4 per 100,000 in 2000, Licinio's team reports. 
During that time prescriptions of fluoxetine ballooned from about 2.5 million in 1988 to more than 33 million in 2002. 
Study does not prove benefit
In a commentary on the new study, Associate Professor Bernhard Baune and Professor Philippa Hay of James Cook University in Australia say the type of study performed by Lucinio and colleagues cannot prove for certain "whether antidepressants do harm or good at a population level." 
But they say that the study "does not support an association between increased suicide and increased fluoxetine prescription rates."
Licinio's team acknowledges there may have been other reasons why the suicide rate declined.
Their research was funded by the National Institutes of Health and the Dana Foundation and did not have any pharmaceutical company funding. 
The researchers declare no competing interests. Licinio accepted an offer to consult for Eli Lilly after the research was accepted for publication.

Is the whinny a horse makes when it sees someone it likes different from the one it makes when it sees someone it doesn't like?
A new database of horse talk and behaviour could help take the mystery out of a horse whisperer's job, US researchers hope.
Physicist David Browning, an adjunct professor at the University of Rhode Island, and Dr Peter Scheifele, a research associate at the University of Connecticut are compiling the database in an attempt to correlate nuances in horse whinnies with their differences stress levels.
They announced their Equine Vocalization Project last week at an Acoustical Society of America meeting in Providence, Rhode Island.
The information could help shed light on the communication styles of other equines, such as donkeys and zebras, and even improve how veterinarians, behaviourists, breeders or other animal handlers relate to horses.
"You would like to find that you get a particular whinny for a particular situation," says Browning.
Snorts, blows, sighs and whinnies
Unlike the monotonal vocalisations of cows, goats, and sheep, horses emit a range of sounds from snorts, blows and sighs to whinnies, which also come in the form of nickers and squeals.
Browning's initial acoustical studies have shown that whinnies have the greatest changes in frequency and could contain information about specific situations.
When horses are stressed, their vocalisations peak into a high-pitched screams; when they are calm, their whinnies modulate in the middle tones.
But scientists are still not sure if the changes in frequency can be connected to more specific conditions.
Browning and Scheifele have begun compiling their database of horse vocalisations from their own recordings and from those of other researchers. The vocalisations are analysed with acoustic software that plots the sound over time.
They have been categorising the vocalisations by behaviour in order to answer some basic questions. 
For example, horses have a good memory and can recognise friends, both human and horse. Browning would like to know if the whinny they make when they see someone they like is different from one they make upon seeing someone they don't like.
Zebras that bark like a dog
As part of the project, Browning will also be collecting vocalisations of three species of zebra - one that brays like a donkey, one that whinnies like a horse, and one that barks like a dog - to try and get a more complete picture of equine vocalisations.
Dr Sarah Ralston an associate professor at the Equine Science Center at Rutgers University, isn't sure how much the study will contribute to the practicality of handling horses. 
But she does think that comparing the vocalisation of horses and zebras could provide some insight into the social organisation of different equines.
"One [zebra] is like a horse with harems and lives in groups, whereas another is more solitary. Differences in vocalisations might reflect differences in the social organisation," she says.

If all the Earth's gold was on the surface we could be "knee-deep in the stuff", says researcher
There's enough gold buried deep within the Earth's core to cover the entire land surface of the planet to a depth of half a metre, an Australian researcher says.
Professor Bernard Wood, a geologist from Macquarie University, in Sydney made his remarkable calculations based on research published in today's issue of the journal Nature.
Wood and colleagues chart the early history of our Earth's development starting with the birth of the solar system more than 4.5 billion years ago.
In particular they focus on the formation of Earth's molten metal core.
"By looking at other stars that are currently at the state our Sun was in then, we can see that they are surrounded by a flattened disc of dust and gas," Wood says. 
"We know that within about 10,000 years these formed into small bodies that were about 10 kilometres across."
Radioactive dating has shown that over the next 100,000 to one million years, those small "planetesimals" collided to form Moon-to-Mars sized planetary embryos. 
Within 10 to 100 million years, larger planets had formed. "In the case of Earth, it was around 30 million years," Wood says.
Magma ocean
Early in its history, the Earth was probably covered in a sea of molten rock, hundreds of kilometres deep. 
During the planet's development, this "magma ocean" reacted with metals in the planetesimals, extracting many of the most important and interesting elements, including gold, and eventually depositing them in the Earth's own iron-rich core. 
To calculate how much gold was in the Earth's core Wood compared the composition of the Earth's crust with that of meteorites, which can be used to represent planetesimals. 
He and other researchers have found that the meteorites had similar levels of all elements that would not normally dissolve in iron.
But they also noted that meteorites had higher levels of elements such as gold, platinum and nickel. 
"This tells us that the Earth is chemically very similar to those meteorites, but the Earth's crust is depleted in all those elements that like to dissolve in iron," Wood says.
There's only one place those elements can have gone - the molten core.
"We can say that more than 99% of the Earth's gold is in the core," Wood says. "It's a nice image to think we could all step outside and be knee-deep in the stuff."

Passenger air travel is growing at the rate of around 5% a year and could account for 15% of man-made CO2 emissions by 2050
Restrictions on night flights could ease the aviation industry's fast-growing contribution to global warming, say UK scientists.
Dr Nicola Stuber and fellow meteorologists at the University of Reading report their findings in today's issue of the journal Nature.
At certain altitudes, aircraft produce contrails - condensation trails caused when the plane's hot exhaust hits the chilly atmosphere. 
These contrails have a surprisingly big but also complex effect on the climate. 
Because they are clouds, they trap heat that is emitted by the Earth's surface, creating a "greenhouse effect" that adds to warming. 
Yet during daytime, these clouds have a cooling effect because they are white and thus reflect some of the Sun's energy back into space. In certain conditions, contrails can exist for several hours. 
Stuber and team estimate the radiation caused by contrails at a busy flight corridor in southeast England.
Using high-resolution aircraft flight data and routine weather balloon data, they looked at "persistent" contrails: wakes that remained for an hour or more after the aircraft had flown over.
Night flights account for only 22% of Britain's annual air traffic but contribute between 60 to 80% of the greenhouse effect from contrails, the scientists found.
Winter flights warm more
Stuber and team also found that flights during the winter months could contribute more to global warming.
"We also found that flights between December and February contribute half of the annual mean climate warming, even though they account for less than a quarter of annual air traffic," says Stuber. 
Although there are fewer flights during the winter months, the conditions needed to form contrails - the right temperature, amount of moisture in the air and aircraft altitude - are found more often then. 
A growing problem
Global emissions of man-made CO2 are between 6.2 billion and 6.9 billion tonnes per year. Added to this are around 1.5 billion tonnes from land use. 
Commercial aircraft account for only a small contribution compared with power stations, industry and road traffic. 
However, passenger travel is growing at the rate of around 5% a year, which means that this share will grow fast.
A 1999 estimate by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) found that the airline industry accounted for 2% of man-made CO2 emissions in 1992. But it would rise to as much as 15% by 2050. 
Environmentalists are angry, complaining that airlines get a free ride when it comes to environmental taxes. 
Changing altitude could also help
In addition to rescheduling night flights for the daytime, planes could diminish their contribution to global warming by changing their altitude. 
A study published last year in the journal Transportation Research suggests that the regions of "ice-supersaturated" air where contrails form is only about 500 metres thick. 
The goal would be to fit sensors on aircraft that could inform pilots where this layer lies, thus enabling them to shift altitude accordingly.

ANSTO says the radiation released from its site was well within regulatory limits and will not affect the health of workers or the community
The operator of Australia's only nuclear reactor has rejected claims that radioactivity released from its site raises safety concerns.
The opposition Labor party claims the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO) has withheld details about an accident at the Lucas Heights facility in Sydney last week.
A pipe inside a "hot cell" used to produce medical isotopes ruptured last Thursday evening disrupting production of radiopharmaceutical technetium-99n, used in the scanning of bones and organs. 
"Only one worker was in the vicinity of the incident, but after examination he has been found not to have received any radiation dose," ANSTO said in a release at the time.
"No measurable contamination was found outside the immediate area where the incident occurred, and there are no off-site consequences."
But shadow minister for science and research, Jenny Macklin, said yesterday she had obtained an internal email from ANSTO that contained information not previously released by the organisation.
The email said a small amount of radioactive gases (xenon and krypton) had been released through the stack and the worker involved had received a very small amount of contamination.
The email said the radiation was quickly washed off the worker and a whole body monitor examination confirmed that he received no internal radiation exposure.
"Trivial" incident
In a follow-up statement this week ANSTO rejected Macklin's claims that it had not made relevant information about the incident public.
ANSTO described the incident as "trivial", although said it had nonetheless informed the regulator, the Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency.
Small amounts of radioactive gases are routinely released during radiopharmaceutical manufacture, and reported to the public via ANSTO's annual Environmental Reports, ANSTO said.
It also said that while the doses received by the public as a result of those releases are so low as not to be directly measurable, they can be calculated.
The total maximum annual estimated dose to a member of the public from those releases is only a very small fraction of the radiation dose received by everyone each year from naturally-occurring sources of radiation, ANSTO said.
"The releases which occurred last Thursday evening were not outside the normal release pattern, were well within regulatory limits and could not be detected off-site," the statement said.
Nuclear debate
Australia holds about 40% of the world's known uranium reserves and is a major exporter of the material.
There is currently debate in Australia over government investigations into whether to set up a nuclear power and enrichment industry in the country.
"Accidents like this show that the community is right to be concerned about the safety of nuclear reactors," Macklin said. "This accident is a stark reminder that things can go wrong with nuclear reactors." 
But ANSTO rejected Macklin's linking of last week's incident with nuclear reactor safety.
"The incident did not occur in the reactor, and has nothing to do with reactor safety," it said.
"This is just deliberate scare-mongering by Labor in relation to a medical research reactor that delivers radioisotopes and radiopharmaceuticals to cancer patients across Australia," science minister, Julie Bishop told ABC Radio News.
The 48-year-old Lucas Heights plant is Australia's only nuclear reactor and produces radioisotopes for use in more than 440,000 nuclear medicine procedures each year.

Reconstruction of the ancient amphibious bird Gansus yumenensis - the most advanced Early Cretaceous bird yet discovered
Spectacular 100-million-year-old fossils, complete with three-dimensional bones, feathers and foot webbing, suggest living birds evolved from waterfowl, say researchers.
Dr Peter Dodson, professor of anatomy at the University of Pennsylvania, and team report in today's issue of the journal Science on five partial skeletons found 2,000 km west of Beijing, China.
Called Gansus yumenensis, the pigeon-sized bird probably resembled a tern or a loon (web-footed fish-eating birds), the researchers say. 
It would have been an accomplished flyer and diver and could well be one of the ancestors of modern birds.
"Gansus is very close to a modern bird and helps fill in the big gap between clearly non-modern birds and the explosion of early birds that marked the Cretaceous period, the final era of the Dinosaur Age," says Dodson.
He says Gansus is the oldest example of the nearly modern birds that branched off the trunk of the family tree that began with the famous proto-bird Archaeopteryx, which provided evidence that birds evolved from dinosaurs. 
"Every bird living today, from ostriches ... to bald eagles, probably evolved from a Gansus-like ancestor," says team member Dr Matthew Lamanna of Carnegie Natural History Museum in Pittsburgh. 
Rich fossil bed
The fossils were found in an exceptionally rich fossil bed in China's Gansu Province, in a poor farming area near Changma, by an expedition led by team member Dr Hai-lu You of the Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences.
In the Cretaceous period, 100 million years ago, it would have been a lake, surrounded by lush plant life, filled with crocodiles and fish, and with dinosaurs and early mammals prowling on land. 

Humans aren't the only animal that weigh up costs and benefits
Rats, like humans, carefully weigh the costs and benefits of making certain decisions, a new study has found.
The study, accepted for publication in the journal Behavioural Brain Research, is the first to demonstrate this behaviour in non-human animals.
A person buying a new car, for example, must weigh the cost and the effort needed to make payments versus the value of the car. 
Rats, and likely all rodents, do something similar, only under a lot more pressure.
"In its natural habitat, rats are facing the problem that little is under their control, so they are facing various levels and forms of uncertainty all the time," says study leader Dr Ruud van den Bos of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine at Utrecht University in The Netherlands.
"For instance, the quality and amount of food items at patches varies over time and between different patches, thus benefits are not always the same."
"The amount of energy spent to obtain these different items varies during the different foraging sessions, as sometimes it's cold, sometimes it's hot, sometimes it rains, sometimes sudden obstacles are present after heavy storms, etc."
T-shaped maze forces rats to choose
Van den Bos and team attempted to duplicate such challenges by manipulating barriers in a T-shaped maze that rats explored. 
The Wistar rats, a rodent developed for research, entered at the bottom of the "T," which connected two arms.
At the end of each arm was a chamber filled with treats. One side had a low reward  - one sugar pellet - while the other side had three to five sugar pellets.
Rats that wanted the higher rewards had to climb steep barriers. It would be like placing a person's favourite dessert behind a high wall that would have to be scaled before the individual could nosh. 
The researchers varied the size of the barrier and the amount of reward on that side to see how the rodents would react.
At first the rats went for the easy pickings, but when they determined more sweets were available on the other side of the maze, they exerted additional effort, but only after a certain point. 
When the pain yielded too little gain, they stuck with the tiny treat.
The researchers also noted that rats seem to behave according to an internal constant standard, a relative ratio for each situation by which choices are measured. 
This is comparable to how a car purchaser may enter a dealership with a budget in mind. Since this standard varies depending on the situation, it is possibly part inherent and part created by individuals.
Rats could get depressed too
Dr John Salamone, professor and head of behavioural neuroscience at the University of Connecticut, developed the T-maze for previous studies. 
He also recently authored a paper in Current Psychiatry Reviews  that determined problems in the brain associated with effort-related processes, such as how much energy an individual will put out to obtain a reward, could be linked to depression.
This suggests rats get depressed too. Salamone's own research indicates interference with dopamine, a neurotransmitter chemical in the brain, may make individuals less likely to work for rewards and biased toward low-effort alternatives.
"Exertion of effort and energy and energy-related decision-making are fundamental for survival, in humans and other animals, and I am very happy that more and more people are getting involved in this sort of research," says Salamone, who added the new work was "an excellent piece of research."

Migraines have been linked to a better sex drive
Being prone to migraine may improve some individuals' libido, according to new research.
A team led by Dr Timothy Houle, of Wake Forest University School of Medicine in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, reports its findings in the June issue of the journal Headache. 
"The goal of this research was to understand migraine better," says Houle. 
"By better understanding how the brain is altered with this syndrome, we can develop better drugs in the future." 
"Migraines have other commonly associated symptoms, such as sleep abnormalities and a higher risk of depression. Altered sex drive may be another quirk of being a migraine," he adds.
Sex can alleviate migraine pain
Houle and team note that it is commonly believed that sex drive is reduced by headaches, and sexual intercourse can cause specific types of headaches.
But, they say, other research has suggested that sexual intercourse may alleviate the pain of migraine in some patients. 
The researchers tested the theory that migraine and sexual desire may both be associated with serotonin. 
Reduced libido often accompanies depression treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), which increases brain levels of serotonin, whereas migraine is associated with reduced serotonin levels.
To investigate this complex relationship, Houle and team recruited 59 adults who had at least 10 headaches annually. 
Twenty-three subjects (7 men and 16 women) were classified as having migraine, and 36 (18 men and 18 women) as having tension-type headache. 
The subjects completed the self-administered Sexual Desire Inventory (SDI), which allowed them to rate how much they think about sex and how much they desire sex. 
"Men reported about 24% higher sex drive than did women," says Houle. "And the difference between migraine and tension-type headache was almost equivalent - 20%." 
Thus, women with migraines reported about the same relative levels of sex drive as men with tension type headaches. 
On the nine-point scale the subjects specifically rated their own sexual desire compared with that of others of the same age and sex.
The migraine patients reported the highest level (5.0), which is "above the expected median (4.0) on this item," Houle and team say. 
Those with tension-type headaches gave themselves an average rating of 3.7 for this item. 
Sexual desire still normal
Houle says the migraine patients were aware that they rated their sexual desire higher than that of other patients in the group. 
But, he adds, "there was no evidence that their sexual desire was beyond that of high normal or that they are hypersexual." 
"It can now be hypothesised that a serotonergic link may be implicated in both migraine headaches and sexual desire," the researchers conclude. 
Serotonin receptors also appear to be involved in several aspects of sexual functioning. 
On the other hand, they point out that there are multiple classes and subtypes of serotonin receptors. Therefore, they conclude that "any neurochemical mechanism(s) that might link serotonin and migraine would likely be sophisticated and multifactorial."

The global IWC meeting has seen a pitched battle for control of the agenda between pro-whaling nations and those who want whaling banned
Pro-whaling nations have struck an historic blow against the moratorium on commercial hunting, winning their first vote in favour of whaling for two decades.
The breakthrough came over the weekend at the 70-member International Whaling Commission's annual meeting in the Caribbean island state of St Kitts and Nevis. 
The Japan-led pro-whaling block is triumphant after forcing a resolution which brands the current ban "no longer necessary".
The non-binding resolution, which has a one vote margin, doesn't mean the 20 year-old moratorium will be overturned.
But it signals that the pro-whaling lobby might finally have the muscle to challenge the moratorium.
This is historic," says said Rune Frovik, secretary of Norwegian pro-whaling lobby the High North Alliance.
"For the first time in more than two decades the Whaling Commission expresses support for commercial whaling."
Environmentalists, meanwhile, have labelled the latest vote "tragic" and say it's their worst-ever defeat in the decades-long anti-whaling campaign.
"This is the most serious defeat the conservation cause has ever suffered at the IWC," New Zealand's environment minister Chris Clark says. 
The win is also a huge symbolic step forward for Japan, as it strives to lead pro-whaling nations to a majority on the IWC. 
Federal environment minister Ian Campbell has criticised Japan's attempt to control the IWC.
"The attempt by Japan to turn the whaling commission back into a whaling club shows just how out of touch they are with world opinion," he says.
Long awaited success or major setback?
Japan and its allies on the commission are triumphant, savouring the first-ever fruit of Tokyo's long diplomatic campaign to lift the ban on commercial whaling.
"This is an historic victory," says Glenn Inwood, spokesperson for the Japanese delegation. 
"This is the first serious setback the global moratorium has ever had. It is only a matter of time before it is gone completely." 
Environmental campaigners meanwhile are reeling from the blow, and some were close to tears after the vote.
"This is the most significant setback since (the moratorium) came into force," says Kitty Block, a lawyer with Humane Society International.
Focus on management, not conservation 
The weekend resolution, proposed by commission hosts St Kitts and Nevis, passed by 33 to 32 votes with one abstention. 
It declares "The moratorium, which was clearly intended as a temporary measure, is no longer necessary." 

The vote represents a major victory for pro-whaling nations led by Japan, who want to turn the IWC away from pure conservation and focus on a return to managing whale stocks for hunting. 
The moratorium, enforced since 1986, still stands because it needs a 75&nbsp;% majority to be overturned.
Japan abides by the moratorium, but conducts "research" whaling through what opponents say is a loophole in the IWC charter, as does Iceland.
Norway ignores the moratorium all together. 
Around 2,000 whales are taken by the three nations each year and more than    25,000 whales have been hunted and killed since the moratorium. 
Japan hopes to use the resolution, known as the St Kitts and Nevis declaration, as a political weapon to argue that more states than not on the 70-nation IWC body believe the commercial whaling ban should be lifted.
Japan complains that anti-whaling states have deadlocked the commission, which was set up in 1946 to prevent whales from passing into extinction through over-hunting.
Having a majority on the IWC will allow Tokyo to control the commission's agenda for the first time since a moratorium was introduced and, environmentalists fear, let Tokyo frustrate conservation efforts.
Not all good news for whaling nations
Sue Lieberman, director of the global species program at WWF International, says the vote should be a wake-up call.
"What is more important than that is this does show that Japan's recruitment drive has finally succeeded," she says.
But Lieberman says Japan was defeated in three far more substantial votes that preceded approval of the St Kitts and Nevis declaration.
In one, Japan sought to remove the issue of hunting dolphins and porpoises from the agenda of the meeting but failed by a 32-30 vote.
In another, Japan lost its bid to introduce secret ballots, something the group has never done for major initiatives in its 60-year history, officials say.
And in a third, anti-whaling nations voted down Tokyo's request for coastal whalers to resume a small for-profit inshore Minke whale hunt. 
"No they did not win when it really counted. And no, this isn't going to change anything," Lieberman says of the declaration.
"This is purely inflammatory and will not help resolve what we agree is a serious impasse (in the IWC)."

An artificial nose may one day help doctors sniff out disease
Doctors in the future may sniff patients with an electronic "nose" to detect telltale odours released as a result of disease and illness.
The technology replicates human and animal olfactory systems, according to a recent announcement by the European Union Information Society's Technologies Program.
The mechanical sniffer, currently undergoing development and testing, could dramatically change how doctors diagnose illness.
The technology behind the device was inspired by the human nose, but its effectiveness is comparable to more sensitive animal noses.
"The human nose is not especially well suited for odour recognition, as compared to the noses of dogs or rats," says Professor &Oacute;scar Ruiz, who is working on the project.
Ruiz, from the Department of Electronics at the University of Barcelona, Spain, says "There are some groups in the world that have trained dogs to diagnose some diseases like melanoma or prostate cancer in urine."
He says the sniffing device would do something similar, only it would use bioelectric sensors.
Sniffing out skin cancer
The gadget consists of a layer of proteins, designed to mimic natural olfactory receptors, placed on a gold microelectrode mounted on a two-millimetre-long computer chip.
One end of the chip is immersed in a liquid cell containing additional microelectrodes, all of which connect to an instrument that measures electrochemical changes.
At present, the researchers are pumping odour-causing chemicals into the liquid cell to record the signature spectrums that result when the nose receptors encounter them.
Skin cancer cells, for example, create distinctive electrochemical patterns, as do bacterial infections, failing organs and other tissue cells, even when they are healthy.
So far, the researchers have worked with an olfactory receptor protein from rats and one from humans.
The proposed electronic nose will need several hundred of such proteins to detect multiple smells.
The human nose, for example, uses 1,000 different proteins that enable the brain to perceive approximately 10,000 different smells.
In humans, however, the brain cannot seem to keep up with the nose.
"The brain gets trained to recognise different odours but, of course, many of them are never recognised," Ruiz says.
The evolution of smell
Our hominid and ape ancestors actually had more keen noses, since they relied more upon their sense of smell for mating, socialising, detecting predators, finding food and other tasks.
Scientists at the Weizmann Institute in Rehovot, Israel, have found that many genes for smell in humans were turned off permanently over the course of our evolution, although the DNA continues to exist as inactive "pseudogenes".
Ruiz and his team suggest that the electronic nose will return some of these smelling skills to us.
The invention may even improve upon nature, at least in terms of precision and reliability.
"We think that a commercial prototype could be available in between five and 10 years, although there are still some important issues to be solved," he says.
"Initially we expect that the devices will work with body fluids like urine or blood."

A silent, unmanned drone could help crack down on urban crime, US police say
Police in the US have launched what they say is the future of law enforcement in the form of a drone aircraft, bringing technology usually associated with combat zones to urban policing. 
The unmanned aerial vehicle, which looks like a child's remote control toy and weighs about 2.3 kilograms, is being tested by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department.
Police say the SkySeer drone will be able to accomplish tasks too dangerous for officers and free up helicopters for other missions.
The technology could be used to find missing children, search for lost hikers, or survey a fire zone, says Commander Sid Heal, head of the Technology Exploration Project of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. 
It will also be helpful in tracking down suspected burglars on rooftops and chasing down suspects fleeing on foot. 
The drone is equipped with low-light and infrared capabilities and can fly at speeds up to 48 kilometres per hour for 70 minutes. 
High-tech kite fits in a backpack
The plane collapses and can fit into a shoulder pack smaller than a golf bag. 
"It's basically a high-tech kite that field officers could set up in a matter of minutes," Heal says. 
A small camera capable of tilt and pan operations is fixed to the underside of the drone and sends the video directly to a laptop command station.
Once launched, the craft is set to fly autonomously with global positioning system (GPS) coordinates and a fixed flight pattern. 
As technology improves, the drone will be outfitted with zoom capabilities. For now, the craft simply flies lower to hone in on its target.
Police say the SkySeer's stealth quality is a big advantage.
"The plane is virtually silent and invisible," says Heal. "It will give us a vertical perspective that we have never had." 
He predicts that unmanned surveillance crafts will become the norm in urban policing. 
Sam De La Torre, designer of the drone at Octatron Industries, has been working on the project for two years and says he has seen demand from other police forces. 
Is Big Brother watching you?
The SkySeer isn't capable of spying into windows yet, but privacy advocates say a future of surveillance by invisible eyes in the sky is an unsettling development. 
 "A helicopter can be seen and heard, and one can make behaviour choices based on that," said Beth Givens of the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. 
"Do we really want to live in a society where our backyard barbeques will be open to police scrutiny?" 
For now, the sheriffs will continue trial runs of the SkySeer to get a handle on its capabilities and work at fixing glitches in its operation, including a "communication interference" that caused the high tech kite to nosedive and crash during a field test last week.

Relationships, family and social standing are all sources of stress for female baboons - sound familiar?
Female baboons get stressed about males and even suffer from premenstrual tension, a new study shows.
According to the research, the number one cause of stress for female chacma baboons (Papio hamadryas ursinus) is when a new male enters a group and may threaten to bully and kill other baboons, especially infants.
"That suggests to me that females are highly aware of the risks presented by violent young males entering the troop," says Dr Anne Engh, lead author of the study, which was published recently in the journal Animal Behavior.
Engh, a researcher in the Department of Biology at the University of Pennsylvania, and her team studied approximately 70 male and female baboons over a 16-month period in Botswana's Moremi Game Reserve.
They collected faecal samples from females for stress hormone analysis.
Prior research has found that glucocorticoids, a class of steroid hormones, rise when apes, humans and other animals feel stress.
Baboons get PMT too
Besides male immigration, reproductive state, predation, rank instability and infanticide also triggered female stress.
The stress hormone rise during reproductive stages is normal, and indicates that female apes, like women, could experience a potentially cranky PMT phase.
Female baboons usually exist in stable, hierarchical groups, but the researchers observed two instances where low status females tried to pull rank and stress levels rose.
In one case, an adult female, her adult daughter and a sister all attempted to usurp the power of another unit. After a week of fighting and high stress, the lower-ranked group gave up.
In the second period of observed instability, an adult female named Cat ran off with a high-ranked male for several days.
When she returned, a "Cat-fight" ensued with the other females. The fights not only lowered the status of Cat, but also placed the unfortunate baboon's daughter, sisters, aunt and their children to the bottom of the hierarchy.
"Our best guess is that poor Cat just had very bad timing," Engh says.
"When she left the troop with the alpha male, more than half of the troop's females were cycling, so there was probably quite a bit of competition between the females to catch the alpha's eye."
Anxiety levels also rose when males, attempting to assert their power, killed infants. For several days after an infant's murder, its mother would scream and flee whenever the killing male approached.
What can baboons teach us about stress?
Engh says friendships with less aggressive males and grooming with females seems to reduce the females' fear and stress.
Professor Joan Silk, a University of California at Los Angeles anthropologist noted for her work on the evolution of social behaviour in primates, says she has worked at the same reserve where the new study took place, and that this "account seems consistent with what I know of the females there."
She says, "The results provide independent confirmation of the supposition that sociality has important consequences for females."
Baboons in their natural habitat appear to cope with stress better than humans do, Engh says.
"Humans, in contrast, get stressed out about many things, often things that are of little significance in our lives or are completely abstract threats," she says.
"We would probably be better off aping baboons and worrying only about the important things in our lives."

Coral reefs have changed dramatically since the arrival of humans, particularly in the last few decades
Coral reefs have suffered more damage since the 1970s than any time in the last 220,000 years, according to a study that warns of the threats of overfishing and coastal development.
Scientists from Australia have found that coral reefs in the Caribbean island of Barbados were relatively unchanged for about 100,000 years before the arrival of humans, despite rising and falling sea levels. 
But according to the paper published in Ecology Letters, modern day reefs now look startlingly different and are dominated by algae and seaweed. 
Associate Professor John Pandolfi, of the Australian Research Council's Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, says human activity has made reefs far more susceptible to change. 
"When you compare that typical coral community in the geological past to the coral community that we see today in Barbados it's fundamentally different," says Pandolfi, who led the study. 
"It's clear that these modern coral reefs have been significantly altered and the only thing that's different is that humans are around. 
"We see that the impact of overfishing and coastal development has had a huge effect the likes of which we haven't seen for hundreds of thousands of years."
Overfishing takes its toll
Pandolfi studied the preserved remains of entire coral reef communities that lived in the Caribbean up to 220,000 years ago.
He analysed four periods in the reef's history, when geological activity pushed it to the surface and wiped out the coral community.
Each time, the sea floor was recolonised and the coral reef returned in a very similar structure with the same species.
"When we look at large scale perturbations in the fossil record, [such as] global climate change and sea level changes, when the reefs come back .... they appear to assemble in similar ways," he says.
"So through out the last couple of 100,000 years we've had coral reefs in the island of Barbados that are very much alike through time."

Budget cuts at plant institutes and their gene banks pose the biggest threat to the world's crops, the architect of a massive seed-saving plan says
Work has begun on an agricultural "Noah's Ark" designed to preserve the genetic diversity of the world's crops beneath the Arctic permafrost for thousands of years.
Dr Cary Fowler is the mastermind behind the so-called doomsday vault which will be carved deep in the side of a mountain in the Svalbard archipelago, 1,000 kilometres from the North Pole. 
Construction of the vault began this week.
Built with top security, the A$4 million (US$3 million) depository will preserve around three million seeds representing all known varieties of the world's crops at sub-zero temperatures.
Fowler is executive secretary of the Global Crop Diversity Trust, an international non-profit organisation that supports the world's most critical crop collections currently scattered among some 1,400 gene banks.
According to him, the main threat to the world's crops is probably not a nuclear war. 
Rather, it is annual budget cuts at plant institutes and their gene banks around the world, as well as the occasional power failure that thaws seeds so that they fail to germinate.
"Of course there is also a risk of wars and other catastrophes wiping out a whole institute. But in most cases there are no big headlines when a variety is irrevocably lost," he says.
Convincing the world of the problem hasn't been easy, Fowler says. 
"But people get a perception of the magnitude of the loss when I tell them that at the end of the 1800s, 7,000 named apple varieties were grown in the United States," he says.
"Now, 6,800 of those are as extinct as the dinosaurs."
Genetics of disaster
Fowler, who earned a PhD in social sciences at Sweden's Uppsala University, says his life changed in the early 1970s when he read a paper by botanist Jack Harlan, entitled Genetics of Disaster.
Harlan was a plant explorer, geneticist and breeder who understood crops, their origins and their use in sustaining mankind.
His seed collections from 35 countries are stored in gene banks throughout the world. Some samples have been returned to their home countries after they were lost from local gene banks. 
His work inspired Fowler. 
"What we will store on Svalbard is not just one or two million seed samples and germ plasm, but the work of countless generations of farmers for thousands of years," Fowler says.
"Our crops are the oldest artefacts in the world, they are older than the pyramids, and they are alive."
No nation has ever maintained a prosperous food system based on genetic resources of purely indigenous origin. 
"Today maize, a native of Central America, is the predominant food crop in southern Africa. ... Soybean, a species from China and East Asia, is now a major crop in the US and Brazil," Fowler says.
Lessons from the potato famine.
The best-known case of a crop almost wiped out is the 19th century Irish potato famine, which led to more than a million deaths. 
The country had relied on only one variety of one crop for its staple food, and that variety had no resistance to disease. 
"There wasn't enough genetic diversity to provide protection," Fowler says.
"Without being able to go back to the many wild species and to the hundreds of farmers' varieties from Latin America, none of us would be eating potatoes today."
The road to the Svalbard vault was a long and bumpy one, but Fowler has played a major role at each stage, from inventories of plant resources to resolving ownership issues. 
"This is the only major problem in the world right now that I say, with a straight face, 'We can actually solve this!' "He says.
"This is the one major problem we can fix, put on the back burner and move on to something else'." 
The Trust will work closely with the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation to help support gene banks around the world, which will remain the first line of defence. 
"But the more I see of the various threats to crop diversity, the better I feel about Svalbard," Fowler says.
"In 100 or 200 years the Norwegian government of today may not be remembered for anything else than building the vault on Svalbard. Such are the immense implications of the vault for the world."

The future looks a bit brighter for the giant panda
There are many more giant pandas than previously thought, say scientists who have been studying DNA in panda faeces. 
Professor Michael Bruford of the Cardiff University School of Biosciences and Professor Fuwen Wei of the Institute of Zoology, the Chinese Academy of Sciences led the study which is reported in the current issue of the journal Current Biology. 
The giant panda is one of the world's most elusive and endangered species. 
The traditional way to estimate panda populations is to examine the faeces for the length of bamboo it contains, Bruford says. 
Researchers would then guess the panda's age and estimate how many different pandas the faeces had come from. 
Bruford says say the new method provides more accurate estimates of panda populations.
"Without DNA profiling you are bound to under-estimate," he says. 
Bruford's team surveyed 26 square kilometres of a Chinese reserve. 
"We really combed the reserve. There were teams of people in a field walking in a line," he says. 
It was previously thought that 27 giant pandas lived there. But Buford's team now thinks there are 66.
Researchers urge against complacency
He predicts that the results would be replicated in other panda reserves. 
"Our results found that previous surveys underestimated the population by more than 50%," says Bruford. 
"These findings indicate that the species has a much better chance of long-term viability, although we must not become complacent, since the population size is still perilously low." 
Bruford warns: "We still may be only talking about a few thousand individuals. These guys are not common." 
Giant pandas' traditional homes have been the mountains of central and southern China, as well as Myanmar and Vietnam.
But their numbers have fallen to only around 1,590, according to Chinese estimates, as their natural habitats have been destroyed by humans. 
China founded its first nature reserve for giant pandas in the 1950s and now has 56 nature reserves for them, according to the Xinhua news agency. 
It also has 183 giant pandas in captivity, while others have been sent to zoos around the world.

Hwang Woo-Suk
South Korea's disgraced cloning expert Hwang Woo-Suk went on trial this week on fraud, embezzlement and ethical charges related to his faked stem cell research.
Hwang, once referred to as South Korea's "supreme scientist", was indicted on May 12 with five other scientists on charges in connection with the bogus research and the disappearance of millions of dollars in donations. 
During the hearing, prosecutors accused Hwang of fabricating research data to obtain millions of dollars in funds. 
"This is a unique fraud case in the academic world. He deceived our people and the world and embezzled research funds by using fabricated data," they said in a statement.
Some 100 supporters of Hwang disrupted the hearing with boos and shouts despite the presence of dozens of police inside and outside the court. 
Several times presiding judge Hwang Hyon-Joo had to call the hearing to order and demand silence from the public. 
Apology
Hwang apologised through his lawyer while admitting he was partly responsible for the fradulent stem-cell research featured in the 2004 and 2005 papers published in the US journal Science. 
"Hwang neglected his duty to oversee his research team," the lawyer said. 
Hwang, 52, became a national hero when he claimed that he had created 11 patient-specific stem cells in landmark research on cloning. 
But a panel of experts at Seoul National University, where Hwang worked as a professor, concluded in January that the stem-cell claims were bogus. 
Prosecutors said they had confirmed that Hwang's claims regarding stem cells were fraudulent. 
Specifically, they confirmed the academic panel's conclusion that no cloned stem cells of any kind were ever created by Hwang. 
If convicted on all charges, Hwang could face up to five years in prison, legal experts said. The trial is expected to wrap up next month. 
Stem cells are master cells that have the potential to develop into any organ of the body. Scientists believe they could be used to fight illnesses including cancer, diabetes and Alzheimer's disease.

A breast cancer cell: around 5% to 10% of breast cancers are inherited
A new gene has been identified that can greatly raise the risk of breast cancer in women of European heritage, say researchers.
A team at Iceland's biopharmaceutical company, deCODE Genetics, in Reykjavic reports their finding in the online journal Public Library of Science Medicine.
It says the new gene, called BARD1, works in tandem with the well-known BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes to raise the risk of breast cancer by as much as 80%.
"The BARD1 variant works together with the BRCA2 mutation in Iceland and increases the likelihood of breast cancer from 45% in those who have only the BRCA2 mutation up towards 100% in those who also have the BARD1 variant," says deCODE chief executive Kari Stefansson. 
And women with the BARD1 variant who develop breast cancer are more likely to have tumours in both breasts, Stefansson said. 
Cancer genes
Breast cancer is known to run in families and has a genetic component, although most cases occur in people with no family history of the disease. 
Several genes are known to be involved, including the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, p53 and others. 
The known BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations only account for about 3% of all cases of the disease. 
The deCODE team is trying to find other genes that work with these genes.
They found 1,090 women in Iceland who had breast cancer, and compared them to 703 Icelandic women who did not. The company has a database carrying the genetic profiles of virtually everyone in Iceland.
A certain BARD1 mutation was found in 5.4% of breast cancer patients and 3.1% of women who did not have breast cancer - an 80% increase in risk, the researchers say. 
Simply having the BARD1 mutation was not especially dangerous to a woman, but women who had it and a specific mutation on BRCA2 had a "dramatic" risk of breast cancer, the researchers say, adding it may be worth developing a test for that particular combination. 
Many on the research team are employees of deCODE Genetics and/or have stock or equity interests in the company.
Mutation in Italian and Finnish families too
This BARD1 mutation has been found in Italian and Finnish families with a history of breast and ovarian cancer.
It has not been found in people of Chinese, Japanese, African-American and Yoruban descent, the researchers add. 
"Therefore, the variant may be restricted to individuals with European ancestry and could contribute to the higher load of breast cancer seen in this group," they say.
"However, other BARD1 variants have been discovered in African-American and Japanese individuals. The contribution of these variants to the risk of disease is still uncertain." 
Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths among women after lung cancer, affecting 1.2 million women globally and killing more than 400,000 every year, according to the International Agency for Research on Cancer.

Tiny cleaner fish grooming a large client fish
Fish who visit mobile 'cleaning stations' to get their parasites removed, check out the cleaner fish on duty first to make sure they get the most trustworthy fish for the job.
Dr Alexandra Grutter and colleagues from the University of Queensland's School of Integrative Biology report their experiments with the Great Barrier Reef coral reef cleaner fish (Labroides dimidiatus), in today's issue of the journal Nature.
A cleaner fish spends most of its day eating parasites off other 'client' fish.
But cleaners are tempted to cheat at their cleaning job because they would much rather eat the sticky mucous lining that covers their clients, instead of the parasites.
So how do client fish get cleaner fish to eat against their natural food preference and establish a cooperative cleaning-feeding service?
Grutter says the answer lies in the fact that client fish watch cleaners while they are with other clients to see who is doing a good job to judge who to use themselves.
Fish care about their image
Grutter used an aquarium-based experiment in which client fish were offered the choice of interacting with two cleaner fish: one that displayed parasite-eating behaviour, and one that did not. 
Given the choice between two such cleaners, clients preferred to spend time close to the parasite-eating cleaner. 
And cleaner fish were more likely to do the right thing when they were being observed by other clients than when they were alone with one client. 
The researchers think the client fish build up a social image of the cleaners they observe, and choose to allow those that score highly to feed on them.
Grutter says cleaners learned to be more cooperative when they were having their image scored, compared to when they weren't.
"These results explain why cleaner fish feed against their preference," she says.
The finding shows that complex social networks exist in the aquatic world, and helps set the stage for the evolution of altruism and reputation, the researchers say.

Landsat image of Salton Sea and Coachella Valley, Southern California - the southern San Andreas fault is shown in red 
The notorious San Andreas fault has enough pent-up energy to create a massive quake, says one seismologist, although he is not sure when the big one will occur.
Professor Yuri Fialko, of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at La Jolla, California, reports his findings in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"The fault is accumulating stress at a high rate, but this does not suggest that a rupture is imminent," says Fialko. "When the quake will happen nobody knows." 
The San Andreas runs north-south along almost all of western California, passing through San Francisco and running just north of Los Angeles, before emerging in the far south in the San Jacinto fault. 
The land on western side of the San Andreas is heading north, while the eastern side is heading south - a movement called slip. 
But slip, between mighty opposing plates, is a rarely a smooth affair. 
The pent-up friction, when released, can cause cataclysmic earthquakes. But the threat can be eased if the energy is released in minor movements, known as creep. 
The northern segment of the fault produced the San Francisco Earthquake in 1906, and the central segment had a big quake in 1857. 
But the southern segment has not produced a great earthquake for at least 250 years, so the big question is when the next "big one" will occur there. 
Satellite images
Fialko looked at the critical question of creep in the southern section. 
He used satellite imaging from two European Space Agency satellites and data from GPS monitors deployed on the ground to get a picture of surface movement in this area from 1985 to 2005. 
Fialko says his data is more complete than that used in previous studies because measurements were taken every 20 metres instead of at ground stations 10 kilometres apart.
Sadly, for the 18 million people of the Los Angeles region, he has only bad news to offer. 

Interestingly, the study found testosterone levels did not explain the differences between male and female war-mongering
The first scientific proof that men who are over-confident and narcissistic are more likely to start wars, has been published this week.
But such men are also the most likely to lose wars, the study found.
A team led by Dr Dominic Johnson of Princeton University in New Jersey, report their findings online ahead of print publication in the Royal Society journal  Proceedings B.
They recruited 200 men and women in an unusual experiment aimed at exploring whether a bias towards optimism may drive a leader to start a war. 
The volunteers were asked to play a one-on-one computer game. 
Each played the role of the head of a fictitious country that is in conflict with a neighbour over a vast field of diamonds on a disputed border. 
Players were each given US$20 for taking part, but earned an additional bounty of $10 per game if they won, either by amassing the most wealth or by defeating their opponent. 
Before the game, each player was asked to rank himself or herself, predicting how he or she would fare against the 199 others. 
In the game, each player was given a virtual treasure chest of US$100 million, which they could spend on upgrading their military, investing in industrial infrastructure or keep in reserve as cash.
As the game unfolded, the player was given updates about his opponent's actions. 
Players could negotiate deals in which they could get access to the disputed diamonds, thus adding to their wealth, but they also had the option of waging war at any time and without provocation.
Victory in war would be determined by how much they had spent on their military, but there was an element of chance, too - the computer equivalent of a roll of the dice. 
Males five times more likely to attack
More than 1,000 decisions were taken by the players during six rounds of the games. Of these, 70% involved negotiation (something that could be done both during peace and during a war); 20&nbsp;% involved doing nothing; 6% involved fighting; and 4% to make a threat. 
Wars occurred in almost half of the games.
Individuals who launched unprovoked attacks were more than five times likelier to be a male than female. 
And they were big on self-confidence, too. On average, a warmonger ranked himself 60 out of the 200 players, whereas those who tried to avoid war ranked themselves more humbly, at 75 on average.
Testosterone levels
Contrary to popular belief, though, testosterone was not a key factor. 
The players gave a saliva test before the game, and these showed there was no significant difference in male hormone levels between warmongers and peaceniks.
On the other hand, there was a clear psychological characteristic among the warmongers. After the game, they were given a personality assessment, which found high levels of narcissism among the men - but not among the women. 
The researchers' theory is that humans have a built-in bias towards optimism because it is a survival mechanism. By encouraging hope, called "positive illusions," our distant ancestors could cope with adversity, strengthen their resolve and bluff their opponents.
But the question is when "positive illusions" become over-confidence - and the impact that this can have in modern-day society, on a president or a prime minister who believes that a war, despite its risks, can be won quickly and easily.
Ironically, the higher the self-ranking, the lower the actual performance, Johnson's team found. 
"Those who expected to do best tended to do worst," the researchers say. "This suggests that positive illusions were not only misguided, but actually may have been detrimental to performance."

It might be a prehistoric phenomenon but human destruction of wetlands has been faster in the last 300 years, the researchers say
Human damage to coastal ecology is not a recent phenomenon, say an international team of scientists: it's been happening since the dawn of civilization.
Whether they settled along the coasts of North America, Europe or Australia, humans have always been reducing the biodiversity of estuaries and coastal seas, say researchers publishing in today's issue of the journal Science.
"This isn't a blame game," says Roger Bradbury, an adjunct professor at the Australian National University and co-author of the paper.
"People in the 20th century haven't started to do this - we've just built on what our ancestors have done."
The upshot has been a depletion of more than 90% of formerly important species, destruction of more than 65% of sea grass and wetlands, and degradation of water quality, the scientists say.
The team used detailed information from 12 different estuary and coastal ecosystems across the globe to build a picture of what they would have looked like before humans arrived on the scene.
Using mathematical models, they created a timeline for the changes that would have taken place in the numbers of different plants and animals.
These models revealed that all 12 different ecosystems would have undergone the same general trajectory of change - a long period of slow decline followed by 150 to 300 years of rapid degeneration.
"It's just the quickening of economic growth and development," says Bradbury. 
"Everything's quickened up - the population has grown and we cycle through things faster now. Plus we have greater control over the world than our ancestors."
By depleting the living creatures in estuaries, we've also had an impact on physical aspects of the ecosystems, the scientists say. 
Recent disasters like the 2004 Asian tsunami and last year's hurricane Katrina were made worse by the loss of mangroves and wetlands, they say.
"The whole thing about estuaries is that you're at the interface between sea and land," Bradbury says. 
"When you tamper with the living things, you have an impact on physical structures."
On a positive note, the scientists report that conservation efforts in the 20th century have had some impact. 
They led to a partial recovery for 12% of species, and a substantial recovery in 2% of
species, particularly for animals like seals, otters, birds and crocodiles.
"Things are grim in many estuaries around the world, but we know enough now to turn things around," Bradbury says. "If we start now, we have a reasonable chance of restoring them."
"This isn't magic," he adds. "It's hard work."

The beads were made from these type of shells
Human culture developed slowly in northern Africa and the Middle East rather than bursting forth in Europe, suggest scientists, who have discovered what may be the oldest shell beads dating back 100,000 years.
Dr Francesco d'Errico of the National Centre for Scientific Research in Talence, France and colleagues report their findings in today's issue of the journal Science.
Until recently, researchers generally believed the first cultural signs emerged 40,000 years ago when modern humans appeared in Europe. 
But d'Errico and colleagues say the new shell beads, from Israel and Algeria, were made for decorative purposes and show progress came much earlier in northern Africa and the Middle East. 
"Modern humans in Africa developed behaviours that are considered modern quite early in time," says d'Errico. 
"These people were probably not just biologically modern but also culturally and cognitively modern." 
Jewellery and other forms of personal decoration were one of the most important early expressions of human culture, says study coauthor Dr Marian Vanhaeren of University College London. 
Searching museum collections
The researchers say that, searching through museum collections, they found bead-like shells with holes in them from sites in Skhul, Israel and Oued Djebbana, Algeria. 
These were similar to shell beads dating back 75,000 years found in a previous study by d'Errico and Vanhaeren in South African caves. 
These South African shells are now firmly believed to be decorative beads, the study says. 
To be certain, the researchers say they wanted to find beads from more than one site in the same region dating to the same period, to confirm that bead working was underway earlier than previously thought. 
"It's very important to establish the chronology of these modern types of behavior, and this paper constitutes we think a significant advancement," d'Errico says. 
Dating the shells
Archaeologists excavated Skhul in the early 1930s using less meticulous methods than archaeologists use today, so the researchers had to do some additional work to determine exactly where the shells came from and how old they were. 
One of the site's sediment layers contained a series of human skeletons, which recent dating efforts placed at 100,000 to 135,000 years old. 
Coauthor Dr Sarah James, a researcher at the Natural History Museum, London, where the Skhul specimens are kept, analysed the crust of sediment stuck to one of the two shells and found that the shells came from the same sediment layer that the skeletons did. 
The shells, Nassarius gibbosulus, are scavenging marine snails that live in shallow waters and are now only found in the central-eastern Mediterranean. 
The relatively large size of the shells from Skhul and Oued Djebbana also seems to confirm their old age, since this species of snail was bigger 100,000 years ago than it is today, the researchers say. 
Oued Djebbana was excavated in the late 1940s. Currently just a single radiocarbon date is available, indicating that the site is more than 35,000 years old. 
Based on the technology and style of the stone tools found there, however, the site could be up to 90,000 years old, the researchers say. 
The sample size is small, but the researchers argue that Skhul and Oued Djebbana are so far from the sea - 200 kilometres in case of Oued Djebbana - that the shells must have been intentionally brought there, most likely for beadworking. 
By studying modern Nassarius shells from Mediterranean beaches, they also determined that shells with single holes in the centre are rare in nature and that Skhul and Djebbana inhabitants must have purposely perforated or deliberately picked out such shells, arguably for symbolic use.

Could our perpetual childishness actually cause genetic changes?
Grown-ups today are more immature than ever, according to research showing that increasing numbers of adults are retaining behaviour and attitudes normally associated with youth.
As a consequence, many older people simply never achieve mental adulthood, says evolutionary psychiatrist Bruce Charlton from the School of Biology at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, England.
Among scientists, the phenomenon is called psychological neoteny.
Charlton, who is also editor-in-chief of Medical Hypotheses, which will feature a paper outlining his theory in an upcoming issue.
Charlton says humans have an inherent attraction to physical youth, because it can be a sign of fertility, health and vitality.
A symptom of instability?
In the mid 20th century, however, another force kicked in, with an increasing trend for individuals to change jobs, learn new skills, move to new places and make new friends.
A "child-like flexibility of attitudes, behaviours and knowledge" is probably adaptive to the increased instability of the modern world, Charlton believes.
Formal education now extends well past physical maturity, leaving students with minds that are, he says, "unfinished".
"The psychological neoteny effect of formal education is an accidental by-product, the main role of education is to increase general, abstract intelligence and prepare for economic activity," he says.
"But formal education requires a child-like stance of receptivity to new learning, and cognitive flexibility."
"When formal education continues into the early twenties," he says, "it probably, to an extent, counteracts the attainment of psychological maturity, which would otherwise occur at about this age".
Genetic changes
Charlton says past cultures often marked the advent of adulthood with initiation ceremonies.
While the human mind responds to new information over the course of any individual's lifetime, Charlton argues that past physical environments were more stable and allowed for a state of psychological maturity.
In hunter-gatherer societies, that maturity was probably achieved during a person's late teens or early twenties, he says.
"By contrast, many modern adults fail to attain this maturity, and such failure is common and indeed characteristic of highly educated and, on the whole, effective and socially valuable people," he said.
"People such as academics, teachers, scientists and many other professionals are often strikingly immature outside of their strictly specialist competence in the sense of being unpredictable, unbalanced in priorities, and tending to overreact."
Charlton added that since modern cultures now favour cognitive flexibility, "immature" people tend to thrive and succeed, and have set the tone not only for contemporary life, but also for the future, when it is possible our genes may even change as a result of the psychological shift.
Cultural shallowness
The faults of youth are retained along with the virtues, he believes.
These include short attention span, sensation and novelty-seeking, short cycles of arbitrary fashion and a sense of cultural shallowness.
At least "youthfulness is no longer restricted to youth," he says due to overall improvements in food and healthcare, along with cosmetic technologies.
David Brooks, a social commentator and an op-ed columnist at The New York Times, has documented a somewhat related phenomenon concerning the current blurring of "the bourgeois world of capitalism and the bohemian counterculture," which Charlton believes is a version of psychological neoteny.

A computer that can decipher your emotions could help online advertisers target you at times when you're most likey to be receptive to their message
Your computer may soon be able to tell what you're thinking by picking up on expressions like a raised eyebrow, a nod of the head or an angry glare, scientists say.
British and American researchers are developing an "emotionally aware" computer that will be able to read an individual's mind by analysing a combination of facial movements that represent feelings.
The technology will be unveiled at a science exhibition in London today. 
"The system we have developed allows a wide range of mental states to be identified just by pointing a video camera at someone," says Professor Peter Robinson, of the University of Cambridge in England.
He and his collaborators believe the mind-reading computer's applications could range from improving people's driving skills to helping companies tailor advertising to people's moods.
"Imagine a computer that could pick the right emotional moment to try to sell you something, a future where mobile phones, cars and Web sites could read our mind and react to our moods," he says. 
The technology is already programmed to recognise different facial expressions generated by actors.
Robinson hopes to get more data to determine whether someone is bored, interested, confused, or agrees or disagrees.
Visitors to the four-day exhibition organised by The Royal Society, Britain's academy of leading scientists, will be invited to take part in a study to hone the program's abilities.
Encoding boredom, tiredness, confusion
The scientists, who are developing the technology in collaboration with researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the United States, also hope to get it to accept other inputs such as posture and gesture. 
"Our research could enable Web sites to tailor advertising or products to your mood," Robinson says.
