Hwang's team cracked this problem by gently flushing out the oviduct to recover the mature eggs. The technique could be useful for conservationists who want to preserve rare species whose eggs are difficult to harvest, scientists say. 
In trouble with stem cells
Hwang, 52, astonished gene scientists last May when he claimed to have created 11 lines of stem cells that were identical to the DNA of their donors. 
But Hwang plunged into disgrace when it was discovered that this research, published in the journal Science, was fabricated.
Similar accusations surround a 2004 Science paper in which he claimed to have produced a stem cell from a cloned human embryo.

Professor Rusi Taleyarkhan with his tabletop device that he says delivers cold fusion with bubbles
A scientist who says he has achieved 'cold fusion' using sound waves to make bubbles is being investigated by his current university after complaints from colleagues.
Nuclear engineer Professor Rusi Taleyarkhan's work has been controversial since he published a study in 2002 claiming to have achieved the Holy Grail of energy production, nuclear fusion at room temperature. 
If scientists can duplicate the results and harness the technology, which is based on the process that powers the Sun, tabletop fusion has the potential to provide an almost limitless source of cheap energy. 
Many labs are working frantically to try to do so, but their efforts are difficult to substantiate and especially susceptible to being labelled as fraud. 
Taleyarkhan, whose study was published while he was at the US Department of Energy's Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee, now works at Purdue University in Indiana and has also been trying to replicate his earlier findings. 
He says he did this in 2004. 
Purdue provost Sally Mason says her office is checking complaints from some of Taleyarkhan's co-workers. 
"Purdue last week initiated a review of this research and these allegations," Mason says. 
"The research claims involved are very significant and the concerns expressed are extremely serious. Purdue will explore all aspects of the situation thoroughly and announce the results at the appropriate time," she adds. 
"To ensure objectivity, the review is being conducted by Purdue's Office of the Vice President for Research, which is separate from the College of Engineering." 
Something amiss?
The journal Nature reports today it has interviewed several of Taleyarkhan's colleagues who suspect something is amiss. 
"Faculty members Lefteri Tsoukalas and Tatjana Jevremovic, along with several others who do not wish to be named, say that since Taleyarkhan began working at Purdue, he has removed the equipment with which they were trying to replicate his work, claimed as 'positive' experimental runs for which they never saw the raw data, and opposed the publication of their own negative results," according to Nature. 
"In addition, Brian Naranjo at the University of California, Los Angeles, is submitting to Physical Review Letters an analysis of Taleyarkhan's recently published data that strongly suggests he has detected not fusion, but a standard lab source of radioactivity." 
Naranjo's lab reported in April 2005 that it had achieved cold fusion by heating a lithium crystal soaked in deuterium gas. 
Engineers and physicists have been cautious about Taleyarkhan's technique but say in theory it could work. 
In the original report
In his original report, published in the journal Science in 2002, Talayarkhan and colleagues say they created nuclear fusion in a beaker of chemically altered acetone by bombarding it with neutrons and then sound waves to make bubbles. 
When the bubbles burst, the researchers say they detected fusion energy. 
The 2004 experiment used uranyl nitrate, a salt of natural uranium. 
Experts have been especially sceptical about cold fusion claims since Britons Professor Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons of the University of Southampton held a news conference in 1989 to claim they had achieved it. 
Fleischmann and Pons were ridiculed when no-one could duplicate their efforts.

A new type of tourism is taking off
People with diabetes are flying to a clinic in Mexico for an injection of pig cells, hoping this xenotransplant will cure them.
But experts are worried about the risks involved with this so-called xenotourism or xenotravel, both to the patient and to the rest of the community.
Peta Cook, a PhD student at Queensland University of Technology's Centre for Social Change Research will present her research on xenotourism at a meeting of the Transplantation Society of Australia and New Zealand in Canberra later this month.
Xenotourism is where someone specifically goes to another country for a xenotransplant, the transplant of animal tissue or organs to treat conditions like diabetes.
Australia currently bans xenotransplantation, mainly because it could transfer infectious diseases from animals to humans.
In other countries, such as the US, clinical trials are being carried out under strict regulation.
But xenotransplants are available today to the general public for over US$35,000 (A$47,000).
The Laboratorio de Xenotransplantes in Mexico has been offering pig cell transplants to the world since 2004 to treat diabetes.
Cook says her correspondence with the clinic confirms patients from a country in the northern hemisphere were admitted in 2005.
"They confirmed with me that there were two people who had already received the therapy in January and February last year and since returned to their home country and they had two more people who were coming across to have a consultation," Cook says.
"They were looking at doing about one a month as an international patient but of course that could be stepped up."
Experts urge caution
The International Xenotransplantation Association (IXA) says xenotransplantation might introduce new infections from animals, so requires "extreme caution".
The clinic in Mexico states on its website that its pigs are raised in "pathogen free farms" and the "isolated cells are examined to establish the levels of purity, viability, functionality, sterility and then cultured before being transplanted".
The risk of infection is "extremely low", it states, adding it has been authorised by a range of Mexican government institutions.
But the international expert community is concerned there's no way of checking what Mexico is doing.
"They claim that they have approval from local and government authorities for this activity but there is no formal regulatory authority," says Professor Anthony d'Apice of St Vincent's Hospital in Melbourne, who is IXA's immediate past president.
IXA and WHO are calling for the establishment of international standards on which animals can be used for xenotransplants and which tests should be carried out to ensure infection doesn't occur.
They also say patients given xenotransplants need to be monitored closely to see if they get sick afterwards.
While the clinic in Mexico requires patients to visit their GP and endocrinologists in their home country, other experts say this is not enough.
D'Apice says infectious diseases experts should be involved in the monitoring.
Under the quarantine radar
Normally if you bring live animal material into Australia it has to go through quarantine. But when the animal material is inside someone, it's not exactly obvious.
"There is no quarantine status that says you must declare that you've had a porcine transplant," says d'Apice, whose research involves genetically modifying pigs to stop rejection of their pancreas and kidney cells when they are transplanted into non-human primates.
"If you go from the United States, down to Mexico, have a transplant, and fly back into the United States you don't tick on your immigration, quarantine or any other form that you've been potentially exposed to this type of risk.
"I think we place ourself at some risk from xenotourism."
While he is short on recommendations on what Australia should do about this, he says Australia should help lobby at the international level for uniform standards.
But Cook says we can't wait for international standards because xenotourism is already happening. 
She says Australia should address the issue now, despite its moratorium, which d'Apice predicts will be lifted in just two or three years.
The problem is, though few people, even in the expert community, are even aware that xenotourism is happening, says Cook, least of all GPs who would be on the frontline of any fallout from xenotourism.
"If I get a xenotransplant I could walk in to my doctor and have a sore throat and just be diagnosed with a sore throat and be told to suck on some lozenges when if fact I could have something a lot more serious going on," she says. 
D'Apice agrees this could be a problem.
"A GP would have absolutely no idea about this," he says.
The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners was unavailable for comment.

Sitting in cramped conditions on a long-haul flight isn't the main risk factor for DVT, researchers say. The cabin air quality may be to blame
Low cabin air pressure and poor oxygenation enhance the risk of deep-vein thrombosis (DVT) in susceptible passengers, a study suggests.
Until now, DVT has been most widely associated with remaining inactive for long periods, like in the cramped conditions of an aircraft cabin.
But a study in today's issue of The Lancet journal suggests there may be additional risk factors.
DVT occurs when a clot forms in leg veins during periods of sedentary activity. The clot can then migrate to the heart, lung or brain, sometimes days or weeks later, and inflict a heart attack or stroke. 
Even though the phenomenon has been known since World War II, it has in recent years become a major issue for the airline industry, through lawsuits in which people who have had DVT place the blame on cramped economy seating in long flights.
The airlines retort that DVT can occur long after a flight, which thus makes it impossible to establish a link, and point out that clotting can occur in other forms of sedentary activity, even from sitting and reading a book. 
The latest research puts the ball back into the airlines' court, pointing the finger at cabin air quality as a potential risk factor. 
A team led by Professor Frits Rosendaal of Leiden University Medical Center in the Netherlands, monitored levels of a key clotting protein called thrombin-antithrombin (TAT) complex among 71 healthy men and women aged 20-39. 
A total of 40% of the people in the study were selected as they took the contraceptive pill, had a gene variation called factor V Leiden, or both, conditions which greatly increase the risk of blood clotting. 
Up, up and away
The volunteers were taken onboard a specially-chartered Boeing 757 for a non-stop eight-hour flight.
It cruised at around 11,000 metres with a cabin pressure that corresponds to an altitude of 1800-2100 metres. 
Blood samples were taken before, during and after the flight. 
A couple of weeks later, the same group underwent the same tests, but this time at a movie marathon, watching comedy and action films for eight hours. 
They were not allowed to drink alcohol, take aspirin or wear elastic stockings during the flight or the movies, and were asked to remain seated as much as possible. 
The group was monitored for the final time during eight hours of regular daily activity. 
After the flight, the concentration of TAT complex rose by about 30% on average across the group. It fell by about 2% after the cinema, and by almost 8% after the 'daily life' experiment. 
The post-flight rise was overwhelmingly concentrated in just 11 of the 71 individuals, especially those who took oral contraceptives and also had factor V Leiden. 
The findings suggest that "flight-associated factors" are the cause behind increased clot formation after a long trip, say the team, which conducted the study for the WHO.
The researchers put the ring of suspicion around hypobaric hypoxia, a combination of low cabin pressure and a low oxygen level compared with terrestrial air conditions. 
Who's most at risk?
The data also provides a useful pointer for medical help to those most at risk. 
There already exists an array of simple techniques or over-the-counter drugs for combatting DVT. 
These include cutting out alcohol on a flight, stretching one's legs, taking an aspirin and wearing compressive stockings that improve blood circulation. 
There is also a powerful anti-clotting prescription drug called heparin. 
This medication has side-effects, which means it should be targeted at those most at risk, such as women on the pill and with factor V Leiden, cancer patients and recent surgery patients, says Dr Hans Stricker, a doctor at the Charity Hospital in Locarno, Switzerland, in a commentary. 
Previous studies have found a two-to-fourfold risk of DVT after air travel, while a study in 2003 estimated that DVT may occur among one in every 100 frequent long-haul air travellers, in business class as well as economy.

Plumes of icy material shoot out from the moon's south pole
One of Saturn's moons, Enceladus, is spewing out a giant plume of water vapour that is probably feeding one of the planet's rings, scientists say.
The findings, published in the journal Science, suggest that tiny Enceladus could have a liquid ocean under its icy surface which in theory could sustain primitive life, similar to Jupiter's moon Europa.
The plume was spotted by Cassini, a joint US-European spacecraft that is visiting Saturn.
"We realise that this is a radical conclusion, that we may have evidence for liquid water within a body so small and so cold," says Dr Carolyn Porco, Cassini imaging team leader at the Space Science Institute in Boulder, Colorado. 
"However, if we are right, we have significantly broadened the diversity of solar system environments where we might possibly have conditions suitable for living organisms."
Scientists have long known that many of Saturn's moons have water. They took an especially close look at Enceladus because it seemed to have a smooth surface, suggesting recent geological activity that, in turn, could mean liquid water. 
Liquid water is a key requirement for life. Several moons have been found to have evidence of liquid water and the chemical elements needed to make life, including Europa. 
Gigantic geyser
But scientists are far more intrigued by the plume itself, a gigantic geyser of water vapour and tiny ice particles. 
"It's basically this giant plume of gas coming out of the south pole of Enceladus," says Dr Candy Hansen of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California.
"The plume is half the size of the moon. It's huge," says Hansen, a planetary scientist.
"Water is being spewed out of this moon. It solves some real mysteries that we have been struggling with over the years." 
Indirect observations have shown the moon, discovered in 1789 by William Herschel, is rich in oxygen and hydrogen. But whether this is because of water is not clear. 
Both water vapour and water particles were observed, as well as a smattering of other compounds such as methane and carbon dioxide, the international team of scientists reports in a series of papers in Science. 
It is possible the plume comes directly from ice, but more likely there is a liquid source, the researchers say. It would have to be under the moon's surface, which is covered with ice. 
"If a wet domain exists at the bottom of Enceladus' icy crust, like a miniature Europan ocean, Cassini may help to confirm it," Dr Jeffrey Kargel of the University of Arizona at Tucson writes in a commentary.
"Might it be a habitat? Cassini cannot answer this question," Kargel adds. 
"Any life that existed could not be luxuriant and would have to deal with low temperatures, feeble metabolic energy, and perhaps a severe chemical environment. Nevertheless, we cannot discount the possibility that Enceladus might be life's distant outpost." 
Hansen is cautious. 
"I think the best you can say is there is biological potential. We have liquid water probably, and it is in contact with rocks so there are minerals," she says.
"And there is energy. But we haven't detected life." 
The findings help to confirm theories that Enceladus was the source of Saturn's outer E-ring, the researchers say. 
Saturn has at least 47 known moons. Enceladus is named after a Titan in Greek mythology who was defeated in battle and buried under Mount Etna by the goddess Athena.

The new technology allows online gamers to talk and listen to others in a crowd
Online gaming characters will one-day have more realistic voices, say researchers who are working on a system that makes nearby characters sound louder than distant ones.
The Australian researchers say their technology will also make other forms of communication in the virtual world - whether for work, study or play - more like real life.
Dr Paul Boustead from the University of Wollongong says this technology will be useful in the gaming world, where players generally communicate by typing text to each other.
Typing is quite demanding, says Boustead, especially for those involved in some games that can have millions of active players.
Boustead says the main problem with current 'voice over internet' technology is that it is one-dimensional; there is no relationship between how someone's voice sounds and the position they are at in the virtual landscape.
But in the new system, a person's voice 'moves' around with their online character.
This makes it possible to have multiple online conversations going on at the same time. People can get closer to those they want to hear and move away from those they are less interested in hearing.
"The idea is that you can walk into a virtual crowd," says Boustead.
"You can talk to people just like in normal life, in real life. And it's quite a comfortable way of communicating with people. People are actually very used to it."
Immersed in a virtual world
For games and other virtual reality devices, this means people can become even more immersed in their virtual world.
"With our system you see through the eyes of your character, you see these other characters which other people are controlling, and you hear them from where they look like they are in the game," says Boustead.
"So if someone is way up in front you'll hear them just slightly off in the distance in the front," he says. "If they're right up close they'll be loud."
He says being able to talk to others in a crowd is important for players in computer games where co-operation with a small group within a crowd is crucial to winning. 
It also means you can focus on the task at hand, rather than typing to communicate in text, says Boustead.
He says the new technology could also be useful for virtual classrooms where students want to listen to the teacher and then form small discussion groups.
The technology could be useful for corporate meetings, interactive online conferences or other events, says Boustead.
"You could have a cocktail party online," says Boustead. "It could be kind of cool."
Delivering the service
The main restrictions on voice over internet has been a lack of bandwidth because having numerous voices and information that identifies their location in space involves a lot of data.
But Boustead says his team has been developing technology that will allow such information to be sent via normal consumer broadband internet.
The system involves an audio server, which creates 'audio scenes', connected to devices on PCs.
Telstra has been running a trial using the voice technology with several online computer games over the last few months with a small group of broadband users.
The research is funded by the Smart Internet Technology CRC.

Laonastes is the only living representative of the otherwise extinct Distomydae, a family of rodents that lived in south Asia and Japan
A squirrel-like rodent found last year in Laos has been identified as belonging to a family of rodents thought to have died out 11 million years ago, scientists says.
A team of US, French and Chinese researchers compared the live animal's skeleton to the fossils of a family of rodents that lived in Asia in the early Oligocene to late Miocene eras.
They confirm, in the latest issue of the journal Science, that it belonged to the same mammalian family.
When the animal was discovered, it made the headlines as biologists thought it belonged to a new family of animals, rather than just a new species of an existing family. 
They named it Laonastes aenigmamus, or Laotian rock rat. 
In fact it belongs to the family Diatomyidae and resembles a small squirrel but is not a rat, says palaeontologist Dr Mary Dawson, of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
Diatomyidae lived during the middle Tertiary period, 34 to 11 million years ago, in southern Asia, central China and Japan.
They were medium sized rodents and had characteristic molar teeth and jaw structure.
The researchers say the rodent is an example of the 'Lazarus effect', when an organism suddenly reappears after a long gap in the fossil record.
Finding an animal thought to be extinct is even more exciting than discovering a new species, says Dr George Schaller, the Wildlife Conservation Society biologist who stumbled across the new animal last year.
The rodent is a nocturnal mammal that inhabits a remote Laotian jungle, and is known to local ethnic groups who call it kha-nyou. 
Scientist have been unable so far to see a live specimen. The only one found had been killed by hunters and was put on sale at a local market where it was spotted by conservation society researchers.

The rainbow serpent, a key Aboriginal Dreamtime creation symbol, is closely connected with Indigenous knowledge of groundwater systems
Indigenous Australians dug underground water reservoirs that helped them live on one of the world's driest continents for tens of thousands of years, new research shows.
The study, which is the first of its kind, indicates Aboriginal people had extensive knowledge of the groundwater system, says hydrogeologist Brad Moggridge, knowledge that is still held today.
Some 70% of the continent is covered by desert or semi-arid land, which meant its original inhabitants needed to know how to find and manage this resource if they were to survive.
"Aboriginal people survived on one of the driest continents for thousands and thousands of years," says Brad Moggridge, who is from Kamilaroi country in northern New South Wales.
"Without water you die. They managed that water sustainably."
Moggridge, currently a principal policy officer in the New South Wales Department of Environment and Conservation, did his research as part of a Masters degree at the University of Technology, Sydney.
He based his work on oral histories, Dreamtime stories, rock art, artefacts and ceremonial body painting as well as written accounts by white missionaries, surveyors, settlers, anthropologists and explorers.
Managing scant resources
Moggridge says Indigenous Australians channelled and filtered their water, covering it to avoid contamination and evaporation. They also created wells and tunnel reservoirs.
"Groundwater was accessed through natural springs or people used to dig tunnels to access it," he says.
"Sometimes they'd dig till they found the water and then they'd build a system so they could access the water. Sometimes they've go fairly deep and people would slither down there and get their water."
Aboriginal people also used terrain, birdlife, vegetation and animals as markers for water, Moggridge says.
For example, they followed dingos to rock pools and waterholes while ants led them to subterranean reservoirs.
"They used the landscape," he says. "For example, you're in a dry area and all of a sudden there's a large number of ghost gums, so you'd think there must be some groundwater."
The Dreamtime
Aboriginal people's understanding of their groundwater system permeates Dreamtime stories, Moggridge says.
For example, the rainbow serpent is a key symbol of creation but its journey from underground to the surface also represents groundwater rising to the top via springs.
Moggridge says European settlers owed their subsequent knowledge of groundwater to local tribes and trackers, and even much of Australia's modern road system is based on water sources identified by the original inhabitants.
"A lot of the old roads in New South Wales are based on Aboriginal walking tracks ... and their water supply would have been along the way," he says.
The Desert Knowledge CRC is also trying to link traditional knowledge with science in terms of water management in central Australia, home to numerous remote Indigenous communities.
Current projects include looking at the cultural values of water, a spokesperson says.

Letting worrying or persistent thoughts into your head before you go to sleep is the best way to avoid having dreams or nightmares about them
Advice to forget about your worries before bedtime can backfire, according to new research.
An Australian study has found that trying to banish unwanted thoughts, like money problems or relationship dramas, actually leads to having more dreams or nightmares.
The study, published online in the journal Behaviour Research and Therapy, found the phenomenon more pronounced in people who tend to shut out their worries.
Lead researcher Professor Richard Bryant, a psychologist from the University of New South Wales and colleagues evaluated the effect of thought suppression on dreams in 100 psychology students at the university. 
The students were asked to nominate an unwanted thought that regularly intrudes their minds.
The group that actively suppressed the nominated thought just before dropping off to sleep reported more dreams featuring the unwanted thought compared to the group that did not suppress it.
Bryant says that when the mind tries to block out unwanted thoughts it searches for alternative thoughts that prevent the unwanted thought from coming to mind (distraction), and monitors for any sign of the unwanted thought (detection). 
"People who are highly anxious, or have a lot of things on their mind, the distraction process suffers, allowing the detection process to predominate, and they are going to think more about the unwanted thoughts," he says.
Theories suggest the tendency to suppress certain thoughts leads to a higher susceptibility to psychiatric difficulties that involve intrusive thoughts, including depression, anxiety and obsessional thinking. 
In the extreme, Bryant says, trying to suppress unwanted thoughts can lead to insomnia, psychological distress and fear of going to sleep.  
Let the thoughts flow 
"Most modern therapies for anxiety disorders, where thought intrusions are a core feature, now concentrate on getting the person to focus on their intrusive thoughts rather than suppress them," says Bryant.
Bryant points out that intrusive thoughts are not always negative. Teenagers not wishing to keep thinking about a girlfriend or boyfriend when they are meant to be concentrating on other things can find themselves dealing with the same paradox, Bryant says.
"The research will help us to shed light on how to manage unwanted thoughts more effectively. If you want to stop a thought bothering you, the best thing you can do is let the subject pop into your mind rather than try to suppress it."

Stem cells harvested from young women's menstrual blood have a longer lifespan than those from older women
Japanese researchers have harvested stem cells from human menstrual blood, a medical conference has heard.
The researchers say these stem cells could be coaxed into forming specialised heart cells, which might one-day be used to treat failing or damaged hearts.
At the meeting of the American College of Cardiology, Dr Shunichiro Miyoshi reported that he and his colleagues at Keio University in Tokyo collected menstrual blood from six women and harvested stem cells that originated in the lining of the uterus.
They were able to obtain about 30 times more stem cells from menstrual blood than from bone marrow, Miyoshi says. 
The stem cells were then cultured in a way to induce them to become heart cells.
After five days about half of the cells contracted "spontaneously, rhythmical and synchronously, suggesting the presence of electrical communication" between the cells, Miyoshi says.
That is to say, they behaved like heart cells. 
The researcher explains that already stem cells derived from bone marrow have improved heart function, mainly by producing new blood vessels rather than new heart-muscle tissue.
He emphasises that it is important that these cells be obtained from younger patients, because they would have a longer lifespan than cells harvested from older donors.

This exoplanet is 13 times the mass of Earth and is shown here with a hypothetical moon
A cold, heavy 'super-Earth' has been found orbiting a distant star, using a method that holds promise for detecting faraway planets that closely resemble our own, astronomers say. 
The planet weighs 13 times as much as Earth and is orbiting a star about 9000 light-years away.
But instead of circling close to its star, as Earth does, this super-Earth is about as distant from its star as Jupiter and Saturn are from the Sun. 
An international team of scientists says the new planet probably has a temperature of minus 201&deg;C, making it one of the coldest planets detected outside our solar system. 
The discovery is billed as a super-Earth because it is thought to be a rocky, terrestrial planet like Earth, even though it is much more massive.
The planet was detected by astronomers using a project called OGLE, short for Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment, which looks for changes in light coming from distant stars.
If another star passes between the faraway star and a telescope on Earth, the gravity of the intervening star acts like a lens and magnifies the incoming light. 
When a planet is orbiting the closer star, the planet's gravity can add its own distinctive signature to the light. 
This phenomenon is known as gravitational microlensing, and it has the potential to detect less massive planets than other methods of searching for planets around other stars. 
Lots of super-Earths
The OGLE project detected the microlensing event in April; a total of 36 astronomers working with OGLE found the signs of a planet, 9000 light-years away in the direction of the Milky Way's central galactic bulge. 
A light-year is about 10 trillion kilometres, the distance light travels in a year. 
Professor Andrew Gould of Ohio State University who heads the planet-hunting group MicroFUN, short for Microlensing Follow-Up Network, says this discovery has two implications. 
"First, this icy super-Earth dominates the region around its star that in our solar system is populated by the gas-giant planets, Jupiter and Saturn," Gould says.
"We've never seen a system like this before, because we've never had the means to find them. 
"And second these icy super-Earths are pretty common. Roughly 35% of all stars have them."
The researchers report their find on arXiv, a website run by Cornell University.
In the past decade, scientists have detected some 170 so-called extrasolar planets, using a variety of techniques. The vast majority are gas giant planets like Jupiter that are hostile to life as it is known on Earth. 
In January, a planet about five-and-a-half times Earth's mass circling a star near the center of the Milky Way was detected using gravitational microlensing.

A circular shape protects certain proteins from being chewed up by enzymes. So could these super-tough proteins be used to deliver drugs?
Humans appear to have lost what may have been a natural resistance to HIV some 7 million years when our bodies stopped producing particular kinds of protein, an Australian scientist says.
These circular proteins, called cyclotides, were discovered by Professor David Craik from the University of Queensland and colleagues, about 10 years ago.
Craik reports new insights into these molecules in the current issue of the journal Science.
The first cyclotide discovered in mammals, RTD1, was found in rhesus monkeys and when chemically synthesised acts against HIV.
Craik says humans have the genetic material to produce RTD1 but we don't make it because during evolution we apparently developed a mutation, which put a "stop code" on its production.
"It seems that somewhere between 7 and 10 million years ago some primates retained this mutation," Craik says.
"It's an ironic twist of fate because if it wasn't for that mutation you and I would have a gene that would produce a potent anti-HIV agent."
The discovery could also explain why some people have apparent immunity to HIV, Craik says.
"There may be some populations that don't have the stop code," he says.
Help during childbirth
Craick reported his discovery of the first cyclotide in 1995 after analysing a small circular protein from a medicinal tea given to Congo tribeswoman during childbirth.
"We discovered that this molecule had a circular backbone and a knotted arrangement ... that made it virtually indestructible," he says. It was completely resistant to enzymes and boiling.
"We thought it was unusual that a protein could be so stable and that's why we tried to find out the structure."
Almost all of the 100 or so cyclotides discovered so far have come from plants, animals and bacteria.
Cyclotides
His investigations show that while normal proteins are a linear chain of amino acids, cyclotides have "stitched up ends" that protect them from degradation.
"There are a lot of enzymes around whose job it is to degrade proteins," he says.
"They target the ends of proteins, and chop away at the ends. 
"Cyclotides are therefore resistant to degradation because they are joined from head to tail to form a circle."
Cyclotides are also naturally occurring, compared to other small circular proteins, or cyclic peptides, which have either been physically manipulated in the lab or "arranged" by a chemical interaction in the body.
Craik says some of these peptides have been identified as promising drug leads but they fall down as medicines because they basically get chewed up by enzymes once they're swallowed. 
"As far as your body's concerned a protein drug is the same as a piece of steak, all it wants to do is chew it up," he says.
But natural cyclotides can be toxic.
Delivering drugs
Craik says the solution is to chemically engineer cyclotides to remove their toxicity, then graft active peptides onto them, using the construct to deliver drugs.
"We're engineering out the toxic effects and engineering in the biological activity," he says.
Craik is working on this principle using plant cyclotides and is currently commercialising a drug for multiple sclerosis.

Tiny speck of comet dust, less than 500 micrometres long, and its track embedded in low-density glass
Scientists studying comet samples returned by the Stardust spacecraft have uncovered a cosmic conundrum. How did minerals that form in extremely hot temperatures end up inside an icy comet? 
"When they formed, they were either red-hot or white-hot and we found them in the Siberia of the solar system," says Stardust lead scientist Professor Donald Brownlee, with the University of Washington. 
The Stardust spacecraft was launched in February 1999 and flew by Comet Wild 2 (pronounced 'vilt 2') five years later.
The comet formed in the frigid Kuiper Belt region located beyond Neptune's orbit and was a relatively new traveller to the inner solar system when it encountered the NASA probe. 
Samples from the comet were collected by the spacecraft in trays of exposed gel and returned to Earth in January. 
The discovery of exotic, high-temperature minerals rich in calcium, aluminum and titanium complicate generally accepted theories about how comets form. 
Far from simple icy bodies with clouds of gas and dust, comets, or at least Comet Wild 2, now appear to be a blend of materials formed at all temperature ranges. 
Forging metals
Brownlee and other Stardust researchers expect to learn whether the high-temperature metals were forged near the center of the nebular cloud that eventually became our solar system or whether they come from another star. 
"If it was formed in our solar system, then it had to be transported from the hottest regions to the coolest," says Brownlee. 
The samples also show a rich supply of olivine, an iron-magnesium blend of minerals, which on Earth can be found in peridot gemstones and in the green sand on some Hawaiian beaches. 
Though it is one of the most common minerals in the universe, scientists did not expect to find it in a comet. 
Olivine forms in temperatures of about 1100&deg;C, which means the mineral would have had to form closer to the Sun than Mercury and then somehow be flung out more than 45 times the distance of the Sun to Earth. 
Researchers plan extensive studies to determine the chemical histories of the sample particles, which will eventually reveal whether the grains came from our solar system or another star. 
"We will know soon," Brownlee said at the annual Lunar and Planetary Institute's science conference, which opened this week.
Between 150 and 200 samples from the comet are currently circulating among scientists and research labs across the world. 
Next month, work begins on another set of samples collected during the mission: interstellar dust grains. 
Unlike the comet samples, the bits of interstellar dust picked up during Stardust's travels are tiny. 
Scientists plan an internet-based detection program of volunteers who will use their home computers to scrutinise images and try to identify any particles. The project, called Stardust@Home, begins in April.

This false-colour image of Earth shows heat escaping to space. Greenhouse gases trap such heat to warm the planet
Greenhouse gases in 2004 reached their highest ever levels in the atmosphere, says the UN's meteorological agency.
A bulletin from the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) says the gases carbon dioxide (CO2), methane and nitrous oxide "all reached new highs in 2004". 
Officials also indicate that a near record year-on-year rise in CO2 levels for 2005 recorded by US monitors, well above the average for the past 10 years, would not come as a major surprise. 
"Global observations coordinated by WMO show that levels of CO2, the most abundant greenhouse gas in the atmosphere, continue to increase steadily and show no signs of levelling off," says WMO secretary-general Michel Jarraud.
In its first Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, to be an annual publication, the WMO says that in 2004 atmospheric CO2 levels stood at 377.1 parts per million, 35% higher than in the pre-industrial age, before about 1750.
Methane has risen 155% in the modern age, the WMO says, but its growth is slowing.
And nitrous oxide is rising consistently, with levels increasing 18% in modern times.
The WMO says these three gases alone contribute to about 88% of warming over the same period.
The average annual increase in absolute amounts of CO2 in the atmosphere over the past decade has been 1.9 parts per million, slightly higher than the 1.8 parts per million of 2004, says WMO environment division chief Dr Leonard Barrie.
Barrie says reports by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that CO2 had grown last year by 2.6 parts per million had to be viewed in perspective.
"It is important to take the long view. There can be fluctuations," he says. "The 2.6 parts per million figure is within past experience. If it were to persist over several years, then we would have to start talking about what it means."

Recurrent miscarriages could be prevented if women prone to thrombophilia are given the correct treatment, new research finds
Women who have had recurrent miscarriages should be checked for a tendency to develop blood clots as treating the condition halves their risk of further pregnancy loss, a new study has found.
Australian researchers followed 220 couples who had had at least three miscarriages.
They found that screening the women for thrombophilia, a tendency to develop blood clots, and giving them prophylactic anti-thrombotic therapy halved their future chances of losing a pregnancy.
Professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at the University of Adelaide, Gus Dekker, says the women were screened for thrombophilia, insulin resistance and elevated homocysteine levels. 
"We found that if you do nothing, these women can expect a 30% to 35% chance of a further miscarriage," he says. 
"But if you treat them, the pregnancy loss rate is halved to 15%. There is light on the horizon for women who have recurrent miscarriages as proper analysis and treatment can increase the chance of having a healthy baby from 70% to 85%."
Anti-thrombotic therapy includes aspirin plus low molecular weight heparin. Treatment for elevated levels of homocysteine, which is another risk factor for clotting, is vitamins including folate and vitamin B12.
Professor Dekker presented findings at the recent Human Reproductive Health Through the Ages conference in Adelaide.
He says the data, literature and the researchers' own experience indicate that screening identified major risk factors in 50-60% of recurrent miscarriage cases.
"We can modify most of these risk factors such as insulin resistance and thrombophilias," he says.
He advises these women should be referred to an obstetrician with a special interest in the area.
Dekker says women who had had three miscarriages or women in their mid-30s who had had two, and did not have a condition known as a blighted ovum, could be referred.
Women with a personal or family history of thrombophilia could also be referred, as could women with a history of pre-eclampsia or unexplained preterm birth.
"Most thrombophilias affect the early development of the placental circulation so treatment to prevent thrombosis and possibly provide an anti-inflammatory effect, can stop the process," he says.

The same mathematical used to schedule trains are being used to prioritise the allocation of scarce conservation dollars
Scientists are using mathematical formulae normally used by economists and engineers to work out which of the world's biodiversity hotspots to save first.
Ecologist and mathematician Professor Hugh Possingham and team at the University of Queensland report their research in today's issue of the journal Nature.
Since the 1980s, global conservation agencies have identified particular areas around the world that are rich in species but under threat from habitat destruction.
But there are many such 'biodiversity hotspots' that need attention, and a limited budget to save them.
Until now, says Possingham, there hasn't been a rational way of prioritising where to act first.
"Do you act in them all simultaneously? Do you try and pick out three of them? And how long do you spend acting in one before you move to another?"
Possingham's team has applied mathematical tools regularly used by economists and engineers to find the optimum way to answer these questions.
"[The tools] run our entire economy, they schedule all the airlines, they schedule all the trains," says Possingham.
"Any transportation organisation is using optimisation methods to work out which trucks should go where at what times."
He says in this case the tools are applied to saving as many species as possible.
"In a sense it's not that much more than third year or fourth year applied maths or economics at university," says Possingham.
"But the kind of people working in these [conservation] fields often don't have these skills so they often thought about formulating the problem properly."
Prioritising hotspots
Possingham's team has developed a method of prioritising hotspots that take into consideration a range of features apart from how many species an area has.
High priority is given to areas where habitat is fast disappearing, little of the area has already disappeared, and where the cost of conserving habitat is low.
Another factor that influences the priority given to an area is how likely it is to conserved in the future.
"If you are going to invest in a place where you're not sure that you'll get the investment, you're not sure the national park will stay a national park, you'd want to get a lot more benefit out of that investment," says Possingham.
"You're willing to pay higher prices for places that are secure."
He says this is exactly the same as trade-offs made in the share market, where you expect a higher outcome for high-risk investments and a lower outcome for low-risk ones.
The team is currently working with Conservation International and The Nature Conservancy to help establish conservation priorities across the globe.
So far Possingham and team have tested their method on five areas in South East Asia and found that Sulawesi would be a higher priority than Sumatra, Borneo, Java and Malaysia.

Supermarket databases could be vulnerable to virus attacks, causing chaos at the checkout
Cheap radio chips that are replacing the ubiquitous barcode are a threat to privacy and susceptible to computer viruses, scientists say.
And a deliberate virus attack could potentially cause chaos at airports and supermarkets.
Researchers at Amsterdam's Free University created a radio frequency identity (RFID) chip infected with a virus to prove that RFID systems are vulnerable despite their extremely low memory capacity. 
The problem is that an infected RFID tag, which is read wirelessly when it passes through a scanning gate, can upset the database that processes the information on the chip, say the study authors.
"Everyone working on RFID technology has tacitly assumed that the mere act of scanning an RFID tag cannot modify back-end software and certainly not in a malicious way. Unfortunately, they are wrong," they say.
"An RFID tag can be infected with a virus and this virus can infect the back-end database used by the RFID software. From there it can be easily spread to other RFID tags."
As a result, they say, it is possible that criminals or militants could use an infected RFID tag to upset airline baggage handling systems with potentially devastating consequences.
The same technology could also be used to wreak havoc with the databases used by supermarkets. 
"This is intended as a wake-up call. We ask the RFID industry to design systems that are secure," says author Professor Andrew Tanenbaum.
With RFID, anything from shampoo bottles to marathon runners can be tracked using radio tags. 
Civil liberty groups say RFID could lead to an unacceptable invasion of privacy and argue that airline ticket information could be used by law enforcement agencies and divorce lawyers. 
Industries in which tracking goods is crucial such as pharmaceuticals, governments, logistics, airlines and manufacturing already use RFID technology.

The concave-eared torrent frog needs to 'shout' to be heard over the sound of rushing water. It uses a form of communication before now only seen in mammals
A rare frog uses ultrasound to communicate, a clever tool that helps it overcome the noise of the waterfalls it lives in, researchers say.
The concave-eared torrent frog (Amolops tormotus) is the first non-mammalian species known to use the ultra-high frequencies that humans cannot hear.
It joins bats, dolphins and whales, and a small number of rodents, in the elite club of creatures that can communicate this way. 
A US and Chinese team reports its find today in the journal Nature. 
Professor Albert Feng of the University of Illinois and team found that male frogs of the species make high-pitched melodic bird-like calls.
The calls sometimes exceeded their recorder's maximum range of 128 kilohertz, more than six times the limit of human hearing. 
The frogs inhabit Huangshan Hot Springs, a popular mountainous area west of Shanghai, where there are loud waterfalls and streams. 
The high frequencies provide a channel of communication that cannot be disrupted by the lower-frequency rumble of the water, says Feng. 
"Nature has a way of evolving mechanisms to facilitate communication in very adverse situations," he says. 
"One of the ways is to shift the frequencies beyond the spectrum of the background noise. Mammals such as bats, whales and dolphins do this, and use ultrasound for their sonar system and communication. Frogs were never taken into consideration for being able to do this." 
The discovery also answers a puzzle as to why the frogs do not have external eardrums. 
"Thin eardrums are needed for detection of ultrasound," says Feng. "Recessed ears shorten the path between the eardrums and the ear, enabling the transmission of ultrasound to the ear." 
Ultrasounds are high-pitched sounds with a frequency of more than 20 kilohertz, much higher than the frequency most birds, reptiles and amphibians can hear.

Long, single strands of DNA, plus strengthening shorter strands, were used to make this image
A nanotechnologist has created the world's smallest and most plentiful smiley, a tiny face measuring a few billionths of a metre across assembled from strands of DNA.
Dr Paul Rothemund at the California Institute of Technology can make 50 billion smileys, each a thousand times smaller than the diameter of a human hair, with his technique.
DNA has long been known for its versatility as a microscopic building block. 
The molecule can be 'cut' using enzymes and reassembled using matching rungs in its double-helix structure.
This theoretically opens the way to making DNA quantum computers and nano-level devices including injectable robots that can monitor the body's tissues for good health. 
But, until now, nano-assembly has been a complex atom-by-atom procedure that is also costly, because it is carried out in a vacuum or at extremely coldly temperatures. 
Rothemund, writing in today's issue of the journal Nature, describes a far simpler and much cheaper process in which long, single strands of DNA can be folded back and forth to form a basic scaffold. 
The basic structure is then supplemented by around 200 shorter strands, which both strengthen it and act rather like pixels in a computer or TV image, thus providing a shape that can bear a complex pattern. 
In a potent demonstration of his so-called DNA origami technique, Rothemund has created half a dozen shapes, including a five-pointed star, a snowflake, a picture of the double helix and a map of the Americas in which one nanometre represents 120 kilometres. 
Rothemund has been working on flat, two-dimensional shapes but says that 3D structures in DNA should be quite feasible with this technique.
One application would be a nano-scale 'cage' in which pharmaceutical researchers, working on novel drugs, could sequester enzymes until they were ready for use in turning other proteins on and off.

Whether your brain triggers you to act violently or not is determined by a complex mix of genes and environment
People who are genetically predisposed to violence have a different brain structure to others, a new study suggests.
Dr Daniel Weinberger, of the US National Institute of Mental Health and team report their findings in today's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.
"[Our] data identify neural mechanisms associated with one specific gene epidemiologically associated with risk for violent and impulsive behaviour," they say.
The gene, which is carried on the X chromosome, produces an enzyme that mops up stress hormones in the brain.
Some researchers suggest that a certain form of this monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) gene is linked to violent behaviour.
According to Australian neurogeneticist Professor Peter Schofield the most profound demonstration of the link was a study more than 10 years ago of a rare family in the Netherlands that had a catastrophic mutation in that gene.
"All the males in that family with that mutation were arsonists and rapists," says Schofield, who heads the Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute in Sydney.
In addition, he says, animal studies have shown that mice without an MAOA gene have aggressive tendencies.
These drastic exceptions aside, the MAOA gene occurs naturally in all of us in one of two forms, one that expresses the enzyme at very low levels, and one that expresses it at high levels.
Some researchers think that there might be a correlation between the low-expressing form and violent behaviour.
But a study done a few years ago, of 1000 men born in the New Zealand city of Dunedin, found no direct link between the gene form and violent behaviour.
What they did find was an indirect link: those men who had the low-expressing version of the MAOA gene and had been abused as children were far more prone to violent behaviour.
Now, Weinberger and team have tried to find out more about how this complex interaction of genes and environment works.
The study
Weinberger and team studied the genes and brains of 142 healthy men and women, who had no history of violence.
The researchers showed the study participants pictures of angry and fearful faces and monitored the structure and function of their brains using magnetic resonance imaging.
They found those with the low-expressing version of MAOA were more impulsive.
Parts of their brain associated with emotion differed in size and activity to those with the high-expressing version.
The study also found that activity of those parts of the brain in males with low-expression MAOA differed more greatly than their female counterparts.
Weinberger and team say their work sheds light on the neural mechanisms involved in genetic predisposition to violence and it could help in finding ways to combat violence using biological approaches.
But they emphasise the genetic contribution to violence is small.
Nature and nature
Schofield welcomes the new research saying it builds on the previous Dunedin study by exploring how genes and environment can interact.
"It's neither nurture nor nature, it is a complex mixture of both," he says.
Schofield says the main weakness of the study is that it studied normal people and extrapolated what this might mean for violent people.
He says the obvious next step would be to see if the results held true for a group of people who had a history of violent crime.
But he says, if the emotional seat of the brain is involved, it suggests that cognitive behavioural therapy may be a useful tool to counter violent behaviour.
Neuroscientist Professor Lesley Rogers of the University of New England in Armidale also welcomes the study.
"This expression of MAOA form is really important in terms of how a brain will deal with a social situation, whether [a person will] go over the top or not," says Rogers, who has written extensively on the relationship between genes and environment.

The deep sea is rich in unusual creatures that biotech companies are keen to exploit. This hydrothermal vent, for example, is home to riftia tubeworms mussels and scavenging crabs
Biotechnology companies are profiting from living resources found in the deep ocean without laws to ensure their actions are sustainable and fair, says an Australian environmental lawyer.
Dr David Leary of Macquarie University in Sydney says his research has revealed there are six companies selling products derived from the deep ocean and another eight developing them.
"They are the main players in the biotech industry; they're North American and European companies," he says.
Leary says while international laws cover mining in the deep sea, no-one is mining there yet.
"[But] we have bioprospecting and exploitation of the genetic resources of the deep sea, beyond national jurisidiction," says Leary, who describes the deep sea as one of the world's last remaining commons.
"People are making a profit now," he says.
Leary says national scientific research organisations in Japan, France, US, Russia, Australia, Canada and New Zealand are also involved in bioprospecting in the deep sea.
He says biotech companies rely on these public organisations for access to deep-sea resources because the companies don't own the specialised equipment needed to explore the deep sea.
"What is difficult, because of commercial confidentiality, is getting a handle on how close industry is to government science," says Leary.
Cosmetics, drugs, industrial enzymes
He says there are 37 patents, filed in Europe and the US, on derivatives of deep-sea organisms.
There are cosmetics on sale derived from microbes that survive in extreme environments found deep below the surface of the ocean, says Leary, and enzymes from the same source are used in industrial processes and research.
A French government agency is currently testing a bone-healing drug also made from these extremophiles, he says.
And there is research into developing artificial blood from the haemoglobin of tubeworms found around deep-sea hydrothermal vents.
There is also research on chemicals from corals on deep-sea mounts, says Leary.

Part of the Maldives island chain from space: Nearly 100 people were killed here following the 2004 tsunami, and over 20,000 were displaced
Some of the low-lying islands of the Maldives grew taller as a result of the deadly 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, a new study has found.
Dr Paul Kench, of the University of Auckland in New Zealand, and team report their findings in the March issue of the journal Geology. 
Despite the disastrous effects of the tsunami on humans and man-made structures in the Maldives, less than 5% of the land area was significantly changed by the tsunami, say the researchers. 
A before-and-after study of 13 small islands suggests that the low-lying coral atolls are tougher than they look. 
"We looked for any evidence of change," says Kench. 
He and his team had already surveyed 13 small islands in the Maldives, before the tsunami in 2002 and 2003, so they were in a perfect position to assess the effects of the tsunami. 
The first thing Kench and his team discovered was that the tsunami was not nearly as high at the Maldives as along other coasts. That's because there is no continental shelf along which the waves could build up and break. 
Instead, says Kench, the highest in the series of waves from the Great Sumatra-Andaman Earthquake were only about 3 metres, which washed over the 1.5 to 2 metre-high islands and then kept racing toward Africa. 
"There weren't these thundering walls of water crashing across the islands," says Kench. "Nevertheless, they all went underwater." 
The islands were also spared any backwash, which doubled the scouring effect elsewhere, Kench says. 
On the contrary, the tsunami scoured only the eastern sides of the islands, where it struck and carried the coral beach sand over the islands. As much as 30 centimetres of sand was deposited on top of one island, with the others gaining 5 to 10 centimetres. 
"It just added freeboard," says Kench. 
The bottom line, he says, is that geologically speaking, the tsunami was anything but a destructive event for the island landmass of the Maldives. 
"I think it's a quite useful paper," says marine geologist Dr Chris Perry at Manchester Metropolitan University in the UK. "The [island] response is fairly minimal." 
But it's not clear whether it offers any clues to how the Maldives or other atolls will withstand rapid rises in sea level due to the melting of glaciers by global warming. 
"We don't know the rates of [reef] growth," says Perry. 
And there's also the fact that many atolls are now suffering from coral bleaching, which stops growth altogether.

Just like her screen depiction by movie star Elizabeth Taylor, Cleopatra knew all about power hair
Egyptian queen Cleopatra used her hairstyles to enhance her power and fame, says a professor of art history and classics.
Statues, coins and other existing depictions of the queen suggest Cleopatra (69-30 BC) wore at least three hairstyles, Professor Diana Kleiner of Yale University says in a new book.
The first, a "travelling" do that mimicked the hair of a Macedonian Greek queen, involved sectioning the hair into curls, which were then often pulled away from the face and gathered into a bun at the back.
The next was a coiffure resembling a melon, and the third was the regal Cleopatra in her royal Egyptian headdress, complete with a rearing cobra made of precious metal.
Cleopatra did not invent any of these styles, but she used them to her advantage, Kleiner indicates in her book Cleopatra and Rome.
Ptolemaic trendsetters
From the time of Egyptian King Ptolemy I, the Ptolemaic queens wore the 'melon hairstyle' with its segmented sections resembling a melon or gourd," Kleiner says.
"When Cleopatra followed suit, she was more traditionalist than trendsetter.
"These same Ptolemaic queens were also depicted in art with the usual Egyptian wigged headdress that had its origins in Pharaonic times.
"Cleopatra did as well, so again she followed tradition and did not innovate when it came to hair."
"But," Kleiner says, "Cleopatra appears to have worn different coiffures in different circumstances, playing to her audience, so to speak, in life and in art."
Kleiner says when the queen was in her homeland, her likely objective was to look like a traditional Egyptian ruler, although she was in fact Greek, and to legitimise the Ptolemaic dynasty by linking it to the time of the Pharaohs.
A group of Egyptian statues recently has been linked to Cleopatra, although the identification can't be proved since there are no accompanying inscriptions.
"These show her with the customary Egyptian wig and the triple uraeus (rearing cobra)," she says.
"This Egyptian coiffure is the one we most often associate with Cleopatra today. Think Elizabeth Taylor!" 
Divine ornaments
The uraeus was associated with a cobra goddess Wadjyt, the sun god Ra and the goddess Hathor, so wearing it signified that the individual had taken on the attributes of a divinity.
Cleopatra also probably often wore the melon hairstyle in Egypt, where she had many slaves to attend to her appearance, including some that were responsible for maintaining the royal wigs.
The Egyptian queen extensively travelled, and did so in style. Not unlike film depictions, Cleopatra would arrive via elegant barge with her attendants catering to her every need.
In Rome, Kleiner believes Cleopatra wore her "Hellenistic travelling coiffure" in places where it would be seen and "gossiped about at cocktail parties."
At about the same time, Kleiner notes the melon hairstyle turns up in Roman portraiture, which suggests Roman women admired Cleopatra and attempted to copy her.
Nodus operandi
Roman leaders Octavian, Antony and Julius Caesar seduced the Egyptian queen.
Kleiner suggests that Octavia, Antony's wife, invented a hairstyle called "the nodus" to compete with Cleopatra.
 The nodus featured a roll over the forehead that Kleiner says may have mimicked Cleopatra's well-known rearing cobra.
The nodus was the height of Roman fashion in the 30s BC, just before Cleopatra's death by suicide at the age of 39.
Karl Galinsky, distinguished professor of classics at the University of Texas at Austin, says he agrees that Cleopatra wore different looks, including calculated hairstyles.
He says they were designed to convey a message and Cleopatra may have had different hair days in different countries.

Drug research company Parexel carried out a drug trial that went horribly wrong. Could it happen in Australia
As doctors scramble to understand what caused the catastrophic reaction to a drug given in a UK trial, researchers say the possibility of something similar happening in Australia can't be ruled out.
British experts are baffled about why six healthy volunteers suffered a massive reaction shortly after being given the antibody drug TGN1412 last week.
Two remain critically ill and four are seriously ill. Two others who received a placebo escaped harm.
It's believed differences between a cell-signalling protein in humans and animals may explain the unexpectedly severe reaction in the previously healthy young men, who were paid for their participation.
They were the first humans to receive the drug, designed to treat leukaemia and chronic inflammation disorders. 
Australian clinical trials experts say we should learn a lesson from the UK experience and consider more sophisticated ways of trialling potentially dangerous new drugs.
Dr Chris Karapetis, a principal investigator in several clinical trials in oncology at Flinders Medical Centre in Adelaide, says Australian trials are subject to rigorous ethical and scientific scrutiny but risks remain.
"Obviously you cannot rule out the possibility of there being an adverse reaction in a trial of this nature," he says.
"One of the things that is crucial ... is that all potential risks are explained to patients, and when it's a new drug, the risk that there could be a side effect that develops that's unknown."
What went wrong?
Doctors say they have never before seen a reaction such as occurred during the trial of TGN1412, made by privately owned German company TeGenero AG.
US drug research company Parexel was running the trial on behalf of TeGenero.
Dr Thomas Hanke, chief scientific officer at TeGenero, says previous tests on animals hadn't produced drug related adverse events or drug-related deaths.
TGN1412 belongs to a class of drugs known as monoclonal antibodies, which specifically bind to target molecules. TGN1412 targets an immune system protein called CD28.
CD28 is a protein on the surface of some white blood cells that plays a part in activating them for an immune response.
Hanke says TGN1412 was designed to activate its target protein - rather than blocking it as many antibody drugs do.
Dr David Glover, a UK drug industry consultant with extensive experience of antibody treatments, says the protein the drug targets may not be the same in all species. 
"I suspect the antibody was designed to work against human CD28 and because it was designed to work best in humans its performance in different animals may fall short of what you might have expected in humans," he says. 
"That is why the animal testing may have falsely provided reassuring results. It could be one of the explanations."
What can Australia do?
Australian clinical pharmacologist Professor Paul Rolan of the University of Adelaide has introduced 70 new molecules into humans during 20 years of clinical trials.
He says TGN1412 is different to many other drugs because it has a very specific target in the body.
"Such 'magic bullet' drugs can be very specific to humans and may not cause adverse reactions in animals used in preclinical trials," he says.
Rolan says the way we do trials may need to become more sophisticated as we search for more specific and powerful drugs.
Rather than testing these sorts of drugs in animals we may have to use animals that have been genetically modified to make them more like humans.
He believes Australia has the expertise to do these sort of trials.
The Garvan Institute of Medical Research in Sydney says it is already using these methods.
In a statement, the Garvan says Australian clinical trials have "a fantastic record".
"It is absolutely vital that both volunteers and patients continue to agree to participate in clinical trials for new medicines," it says.
What's the future for antibody treatments?
Glover says no one should lose sight of the benefits of antibody drugs.
He says the focus shouldn't be on antibody treatments in general, or stopping clinical trials. 
The breast cancer drug Herceptin, made by the Swiss pharmaceutical Roche, is an antibody treatment.
It attaches itself to the HER2 receptor on the cancer cells and blocks them from receiving growth signal. 
Eighteen antibody products have been approved for sale and their combined worldwide sales reached $US14 billion (A$19.3 billion) last year.
But Glover says trials of drugs targeting the protein CD28 should be reviewed.
"Should we stop doing trials that are directed against the target CD28? I think the answer is yes, until more is known about what it going on," he says. 
The UK's Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency is conducting an enquiry into what went wrong and results are expected in the coming weeks.

Will bird flu vaccines be out of date by the time they are ready for use?
The H5N1 bird flu in humans has evolved into two separate strains, a development that will complicate the search for a vaccine and the prevention of a pandemic, US researchers report. 
The genetic diversification of the pool of H5N1 avian influenza viruses with the potential to cause a human influenza pandemic heightens the need for careful surveillance, researchers said at the International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases in Atlanta. 
"Back in 2003 we only had one genetically distinct population of H5N1 with the potential to cause a human pandemic. Now we have two," says Dr Rebecca Garten of the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC), who helped to conduct the study. 
One of the two strains, or clades, made people sick in Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand in 2003 and 2004 and the second, a cousin of the first, caused the disease in people in Indonesia in 2005. 
Two clades may share the same ancestor but are genetically distinct, as are different clades, or strains, of HIV, the team from the CDC found. 
"This does complicate vaccine development. But we are moving very swiftly to develop vaccines against this new group of viruses," says Dr Nancy Cox, chief of the CDC's influenza branch.
The H5N1 strain of bird flu has spread across Europe, Africa and parts of Asia and killed nearly 100 people worldwide and infected about 180 since it reemerged in 2003. 
Although it is difficult to catch bird flu, people can become infected if they come into close contact with infected birds.
Scientists fear the virus could mutate into a form that could pass easily between humans, triggering a pandemic in which millions could die.
Transmission from human to human?
All influenza viruses mutate easily, and H5N1 appears to be no exception. 
But Cox says the evolution of a second clade does not move the virus closer to human-to-human transmission. 
"Like the group one or clade one viruses, the group two or clade two viruses are not easily transmitted from person to person," she says.
"It really doesn't take us closer to a pandemic. It simply makes preparing for the pandemic a bit more difficult." 
The US Department of Health and Human Services has already recognised the two strains and approved the development of a second H5N1 vaccine based on the second clade. 
Several companies are working on H5N1 vaccines experimentally, although current formulations are not expected to protect very well, if at all, against any pandemic strain. 
A vaccine against a pandemic flu strain would have to be formulated using the actual virus passing from person to person.
Partial protection
Researchers say while vaccines were needed against different strains of the virus, a vaccination against one clade could provide partial protection against another. 
"We would expect the priming [of a patient] with a clade one [vaccine] could potentially reduce the severity of disease," Cox says.
For their study, Garten and colleagues analysed more than 300 H5N1 virus samples taken from both infected birds and people from 2003 through the northern hemisphere summer of 2005.
Garten says the bird flu strains being detected in Europe are generally clade two strains.

The northern Queensland town of Innisfail copped the full force of Cyclone Larry
When tropical Cyclone Larry lashed the Queensland coast at the weekend it raised questions of whether it was a sign of a changing climate.
Could it be the harbinger of a new drought-busting La Ni&ntilde;a weather cycle? Could it be a product of human-induced climate change?
Or is it just too soon to tell?
Larry slammed into Australia's northeast coast on Sunday morning, local time.
Initial reports said it was the most powerful cyclone to hit the continent in decades, moving at unusual speed and packing winds of up to 290 kilometres an hour.
Dr Geoff Love, director of meteorology at the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) says Larry was on a par with Cyclone Tracey, which devastated Darwin in 1974.
The BOM categorises cyclones from 1 to 5, with 5 being the most severe.
Love says Larry was probably "high category 4, probably not quite 5" and neither unusual nor unexpected.
"Larry was no different from any other tropical cyclone," he says.
But Love says more cyclones hit tropical Queensland in La Ni&ntilde;a conditions, a possible sign that Australia is headed for a change after emerging from El Ni&ntilde;o three years ago.
"With an El Ni&ntilde;o, cyclones tend to form out closer to the dateline and probably occur before they reach Australian longitude, in La Ni&ntilde;a they form closer to the Australian coast," he says 
Pacific oscillations
Records going back to the 1880's show a clear La Ni&ntilde;a-El Ni&ntilde;o cycle, Love says.
The La Ni&ntilde;a  and El Ni&ntilde;o effects are two extremes of an atmospheric and oceanic oscillation in the Pacific Ocean.
They have a direct and significant impact on climate in some parts of the world, including Australia.
El Ni&ntilde;o occurs when the surface of the ocean warms and leads to drier conditions in Australia, which mean more droughts and fires.
Cooling surface waters cause La Ni&ntilde;a , which causes wetter conditions and more flooding.
The two phases switch every few years. But they don't always neatly alternate, making it difficult to make predictions.
Love says there have been about 20 El Ni&ntilde;os and 20 La Ni&ntilde;a s in the past 120 years. 
This amounts to about 20 six year cycles made up of roughly four neutral years and two years of El Ni&ntilde;o or La Ni&ntilde;a, or one year of each.
Australia is currently in what Love calls a "neutral, weak, wishy-washy" period, although there are signs we're trending towards La Ni&ntilde;a.
"I think we have been sort of just on the borderline," he says.
"The Americans have a lower threshold, they're calling it a weak La Ni&ntilde;a. We're saying it's just short of being a La Ni&ntilde;a."
 What about climate change?
The latest global tropical cyclone season, which is just coming to an end, has been described as one of the worst in recent times, making it tempting to view Cyclone Larry as a product of human-related climate change.
Grant Beard, a climatologist with the BOM's National Climate Centre, says the recent increase in intense tropical cyclones may be linked to warming. 
"Looking at the globe ... it seems that the number of intense tropical cyclones has increased over the last 30 years," he says.
"That's linked probably to the rising ocean temperatures and this is one sign of the enhanced greenhouse effect."
Dr Kevin Walsh is associate professor of meteorology at the University of Melbourne and previously worked on the effect of climate change on tropical cyclones at CSIRO.
He says climate change is likely to have some impact on cyclones, although this is yet to be proved.
"All the projections say sea temperatures are warming and there are well known theoretical relationships between the warmth of the ocean and tropical cyclones," he says.
"But it's controversial whether those effects have yet been detected."
Love says only time will tell whether Larry is the product of climate change.
"The jury's out," he says. "Any one event by itself doesn't prove or disprove anything."

The artificial muscles work just like real ones, converting chemical energy into mechanical energy
Artificial muscles have been made in the lab that are 100 times stronger than the real thing, a recent study shows.
Two kinds of these super-strong artificial muscles can convert chemical energy into mechanical energy, making them function like natural muscles, the scientists say.
Dr Von Howard Ebron and colleagues, from the NanoTech Institute at University of Texas at Dallas report their progress in the current issue of the journal Science.
The artificial muscles could help usher in an entirely new breed of so-called fuel-cell muscles, the scientists say.
These receive chemical fuel, such as hydrogen or methanol, through a circulatory system, convert it to mechanical energy, and store any unused energy for later. 
Such muscles could be used to move robots and robotic exoskeletons, or as part of structures on air and marine vehicles that morph into different shapes. 
"In the future, the humanoid robot sitting next to you at the bar may be drinking alcohol in order to work the next day," says Professor Ray Baughman, the research team leader and director of the NanoTech Institute. 
One of the most successful kinds of artificial muscle consists of a stretchy material, which does not conduct electricity, sandwiched between two layers of material that do. 
When an electric current is applied, the plus and minus charges accumulate on opposite layers of the sandwich. They are attracted to each other and squeeze down on the rubbery centre, giving the muscle its flexing ability. 
A cord or batteries normally supply the power. But Baughman's team created two kinds of artificial muscles charged by a chemical reaction, eliminating the need for range-limiting power cords and bulky, short-lived batteries. 
"The approach is not without challenges, but it could transform the way complex mechanical systems are built," writes Dr John Madden, an assistant professor at the University of British Columbia, in the same issue of the journal.
Carbon nanotubes
In the first approach, the scientists coated a sheet made of pure carbon nanotubes with platinum nanoparticles. They immersed the sheet into a solution of sulfuric acid. 
A chemical reaction accelerated by the platinum catalyst converts each molecule of the hydrogen fuel to two protons and two electrons. 
Repulsion between the electrons causes the nanotubes to expand. 
In the second approach, the scientists used a special filament known as shape-memory wire, which can be trained to contract into a particular shape when heat is applied to it. 
The team coated a straight memory wire with platinum nanoparticles and then exposed it to vapours from methanol mixed with air. 
A chemical reaction occurred between the the alcohol and the oxygen in the air, which produced heat and caused the wire to contract. 
Both types of muscles could be used in autonomous robots or as robotic armor worn by soldiers or astronauts to give them super-human strength, the scientists say. 
Baughman imagines that the technology could eventually use sugars in the human body as fuel and enzymes instead of platinum to work one important artificial muscle: a heart.

Female eastern whipbirds sing with a regional accent, which biologists say may be related to coordinating reproductive activities
Female whipbirds in Australia sing the same basic songs, but with regional accents, researchers show.
Female birds in general rarely sing, so this latest find itself is unusual.
But the find is doubly noteworthy because the scientists observed that the males of this species, Psophodes olivaceus, sing with no accent whatsoever. 
"It is so intriguing to see both of these opposite patterns occurring within the same species," says lead researcher Daniel Mennill, a professor of behavioural ecology at the University of Windsor in Canada. 
"You wouldn't be shocked to visit one town and hear people speak with a twang, and then visit another town and hear a drawl," he says.
"But can you imagine if, in your travels, you found that females sounded different in each town, but males had the same brogue? These whipbirds demonstrate such a pattern." 
Mennill and his colleague Amy Rogers, from the University of Melbourne, measured eastern whipbird recordings from 16 different populations along the east coast of Australia.
For each of the 112 birds they recorded, they measured the song's number of syllables, the length of the first syllable, the highest and lowest frequency of the last syllable, the time between these frequency extremes and other characteristics. 
The vast majority of female recordings showed variations on each of these criteria, but male songs were all virtually identical. 
The researchers publish their findings in a recent issue of the Journal of Avian Biology and post samples of the birdsong on their website.
Cracking the whip
In the wild, the males and females sing duets. Males initiate the duet with a long whistle and an ear-splitting 'whip crack'. Females then respond with a sharp 'chew chew'. 
"In my opinion, the 'whip crack' sound might be the most extraordinary note produced by any beast in the animal kingdom," Mennill says.
"It involves a pure tone that ascends or descends extremely rapidly across a very broad frequency spectrum. It is possible that this note is difficult to perform, and that females may favour males who are capable of executing this difficult note effectively." 
While males must sing their hearts out for females, both males and females engage in their own same-sex singing contests.
For these contests, usually each bird will perch itself near its territory boundaries. Birds then sing back and forth, trying to match the song sung by the opponent. Often the songs wind up overlapping.
Interesting findings
Peter Slater, a professor of natural history at the University of St Andrews in Scotland, agrees with the findings.
"The real surprise here is the stereotypy [repetitive sameness] of the males ... In some other birds, females appear to choose mates on the basis that they perform a song that is quite hard to produce. I like the idea that the whip crack may be such a phenomenon and this might explain its very unusual stereotypy," Slater says.
In terms of accents, he says that geographical variations, or dialects, are found in other songbirds, whales, seals and primates. 
Mennill suggests that females may benefit by sharing songs that are similar to those of nearby females. While these benefits remain unclear, it is possible that the singing helps to somehow coordinate reproductive activities. 
Male eastern whipbirds perhaps might have evolved accents too, if it were not for their impressive 'whip crack' song with its stunning finale.

The technique may one-day be used to search earthquake rubble for survivors, the researchers say
A laser-like beam of light shone at a unique solid makes the material appear to disappear, according to a new study. 
The effect, reported in a recent issue of the journal Nature Materials, occurs at infrared light wavelengths, so it can't be seen with the human eye. 
"[But] if it worked in the visible light with molecules that make up your hand, when the laser hit your hand, your hand would go transparent," says team member Professor Chris Phillips, a physicist at Imperial College London.
"And then if you turned the laser up a little more, the scene you'd see through your hand would become brighter," as the effect amplifies light in the beam, he says. 
Phillips and his colleagues from the University of Neuch&acirc;tel, Switzerland, think the method could one day work in visible light and lead to new technologies that help see through rubble to search for victims at a disaster site or observe internal body parts obscured by bone. 
The scientists accomplished their feat with materials used to make semiconductor chips.
Normally, electrons that make up atoms in these materials interact with light beams in a benign way. 
But Phillips and his team re-engineered the material to contain artificial atoms, specially patterned crystals a few billionths of a metre long. 
Because the atoms are artificial, the scientists could adjust the activity of the electrons, which have wavelike characteristics. 
When the light beam was shone onto the material, it influenced the wavelike patterns of the electrons inside the artificial atoms so that they cancelled each other out and created a new, transparent material that was half matter and half light. 
The scientists went on to amplify the light beam, even though 80% of the artificial atoms stayed in a state of so-called low excitation. 
This contradicts a theory posed by Albert Einstein that says in order to amplify the light in a laser beam, the majority of the atoms must be in state of high excitation. 
"They have shown this can now be implemented in a solid-state medium, which could be very important for more practical applications," says Lene Vestergaard Hau, professor of applied physics at Harvard University. 
In the future, the researchers aim to become better at controlling and amplifying the light beam so that they may not need a specially patterned structure to make the see-through effect work.

The 2002 launch: scramjet technology could one-day be used in planes that fly from London to Sydney in two hours, say the researchers
A new scramjet engine, shaped like a bullet, will be tested in the Australian desert tomorrow by an international team of scientists that hopes it will be more efficient than previous designs.
Australian researchers from the HyShot Flight Program at the University of Queensland, will test the new scramjet, developed by a British defence technology company, QinetiQ.
The experiment is to be carried out on Australian defence property at Woomera in South Australia this Friday local time and is also sponsored by the US Air Force and the Canadian Air Force.
A scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet) operates at speeds greater than Mach 5, or five times the speed of sound. 
It is able to deliver a sustained thrust at hypersonic speed by rapidly sucking in oxygen and burning hydrogen fuel, releasing steam as exhaust.
The HyShot team carried out the world's first successful scramjet test flight at Woomera in 2002 with a University of Queensland-designed engine.
That original design had a two-dimensional wedge-shaped air intake and a rectangular-shaped combustor, says Associate Professor Michael Smart, who designs scramjets with the HyShot team.
He says the new scramjet has a three-dimensional bullet-shaped intake with an elliptical shaped combustor.
And the shape of the engine affects how efficiently air is scooped up.
"It's a ram effect and there are lots of different shapes you can use to try to push that air down through the engine, so we're just trying out different ones," he told ABC Science Online by phone from the Woomera test site.

The H5N1 bird flu virus doesn't lock onto the right receptors in humans, says new research
Virologists say they understand why bird flu in its present form does not spread among humans.
The finding suggests the world may have a precious breathing space to prepare for any flu pandemic. 
The reason lies in minute differences to cells located in the top and bottom of the airways, the team reports in today's issue of the journal Nature.
To penetrate a cell, the spikes that stud an influenza virus have to be able to bind to the cellular surface. 
The virus spike is like a key and the cell's docking point, called a receptor, is like a lock. They both have to be the right shape for the connection to happen. 
Scientists in the US and Japan, led by Professor Yoshihiro Kawaoka of the University of Wisconsin at Madison, found that avian influenza viruses and human influenza viruses home in on slightly different receptors.
The receptor preferred by human flu is more prevalent in cells in the mucous lining of the nose and sinus as well as the throat, trachea and bronchi.
But the receptor preferred by bird flu tends to be found among cells deep in the lung, in ball-like structures called the alveoli. 
It means H5N1 is likely to hole up in a part of the airways that does not cause coughing and sneezing, the means by which the flu virus is classically transmitted among humans.
Birds infecting humans
Bird flu is lethal to poultry and dangerous for humans in close proximity to infected fowl. It has claimed more than 100 lives, according to the World Health Organization. 
But, apart from a few anecdotal cases, the mortality has occurred exclusively by direct transmission from birds to humans and not among humans themselves. To acquire that contagiousness would open the way to a pandemic. 
"Our findings indicate that H5N1 virus ... can replicate efficiently only in cells in the lower region of the respiratory tract, where the avian virus receptor is prevalent," the paper says. 
"This restriction may contribute to the inefficient human-to-human transmission of H5N1 viruses seen to date." 
