The disease affects young crocodiles, between three and five months old, causing an eye discharge and severe inflammation at the back of the throat that stops them from breathing.
"These crocodiles are dying from obstruction of the larynx," says Jerrett. "They can't breathe because of the amount of damage in the back of the throat."
The disease has been found so far on four of the five large crocodile farms in the Northern Territory, says Jerrett, with two farms seriously affected.
"One farm, over a period of two months, lost about 2000 of their young crocodiles, which was nearly the whole crop for that year," he says. 
"And another farm lost over 1000 which was about 30% of their crop for the year."
At first a pox virus was suspected but virtually all the samples taken from the animals have since shown the culprit is chlamydia, unusual bacteria that need host cells to multiply. 
The researchers will use DNA analysis to compare the strain to those that infect other animals such as wild birds. But they suspect it will be a strain specific to crocodiles.
The strain involved is related to the strains that infect columnar epithelial cells in the genitals and eyes of koalas and humans, says Jerrett.

Mosquitoes carrying the malarial parasite are responsible for killing about a million people a year
DDT, the long-banned insecticide blamed for killing birds and other wildlife, is now approved for use indoors to fight malaria, says the World Health Organization.
"One of the best tools we have against malaria is indoor residual house spraying," says Dr Arata Kochi, director of the WHO malaria department.
"Of the dozen pesticides WHO has approved as safe for house spraying, the most effective is DDT."
For about US$5 per house, indoor spraying with DDT is a cost-effective response to malaria, says the WHO.
Malaria kills about a million people annually, most of them children under five.
In parts of Africa and Asia where malaria-carrying mosquitoes spread the disease, 85% of home dwellers approached by health workers allow their houses to be sprayed, say global health officials. 
DDT came into common use in the 1930s as an agricultural insecticide. It became notorious after biologist and ecologist Rachel Carson's 1962 book Silent Spring exposed how DDT entered the food chain, killing wildlife and threatening humans.
In 1969, the US National Cancer Institute announced findings that DDT could cause cancer, and a US federal ban was imposed in 1972.
Richard Tren, director of the group Africa Fighting Malaria, stresses the difference between agricultural DDT sprayed outdoors and the residual spraying means to act like a giant mosquito net over individual houses.
"The environmental impact associated with spraying insecticides, whether it's DDT or other insecticides, indoors is minimal, it's negligible ... This is as unrelated to Silent Spring as anything," Tren says. "The science is very clear that there are no harmful human effects."
Tren says environmental groups in Africa support its use. 
In Washington, the director of the Sierra Club's environmental quality program gives muted backing to the plan. 
"Reluctantly, we do support it," says the group's Ed Hopkins. "Malaria kills millions of people and when there are no other alternatives to indoor use of DDT, and where that use will be well-monitored and controlled, we support it." 
Hopkins stresses the need for safer alternatives to DDT, "because DDT is not a silver bullet to solve this problem".

Damaged telomeres have prevented this yeast cell from dividing. Instead, it has continuously replicated its DNA to prepare for division. This has resulted in numerous copies of DNA, seen here as multiple bright spots
An Australian-born scientist is among three researchers who have been awarded a prestigious Lasker award for the discovery of telomerase, an enzyme key to ageing and cancer.
Professor Elizabeth Blackburn, of the University of California, San Francisco, has been awarded the Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research.
She shares the award with Professor Carol Greider of Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore and Professor Jack Szostak of Harvard Medical School and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. 
The three predicted and discovered telomerase, an enzyme that synthesises and protects the telomeres at the ends of chromosomes.
Their discoveries laid the groundwork for studies connecting telomerase and telomeres to human cancer and age-related conditions. 
"Today, telomerase research is one of the hottest fields of biomedical science," says Dr Joseph Goldstein, who won a Lasker and a Nobel prize for helping to discover cholesterol and who chairs the Lasker jury. 
Blackburn, a stem cell scientist, was dismissed from the US President's Council on Bioethics in 2005 amid controversy over her support of embryonic stem cell research, which President George W Bush opposes.
The awards, considered the US equivalents of the Nobel prizes for medical research, carry an award of US$100,000.
The Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research went to Aaron Beck, emeritus professor of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, for developing cognitive therapy. 
Cognitive therapy, a type of talk therapy, can treat mental conditions such as depression, suicidal behaviour, and eating disorders.
The Lasker Award for Special Achievement in Medical Science went to Joseph Gall, of the Carnegie Institution's Department of Embryology at Baltimore, for his work as a founder of modern cell biology and an early champion of women in science. 
Gall invented a technique called in situ hybridisation, now routinely used by scientists.
"This method can pinpoint a single gene among the 30,000 present in the genomes of humans and animals," Goldstein says. 
The Lasker Awards, first presented in 1946, are administered by the Lasker Foundation.

The ability to download music has made it possible for athletes to better exploit the power of music while training and competing
Technology like the mp3 player is revolutionising sports psychology, according to an expert who says these devices are allowing athletes to harness the psychological benefits of music as never before.
Professor Peter Terry of the University of Southern Queensland says technology like running shoes that increase the beat of music in time with a runner's pace and even implantable micro-mp3 players may one day give athletes the winning edge.
"It's certainly going to add a new level to [athletic] potential," says Terry, who has been to seven Olympic Games as a sports psychologist and published widely on the power of music in enhancing athletic performance.
But he says the technology could create a whole new conundrum for sports authorities by making them redefine whether the use of performance enhancing music is cheating.
Terry will talk about the latest research into the psychological effects of music in sport at a joint conference of the Australian Psychological Society and the New Zealand Psychological Society in Auckland next week.
Terry says the benefits of music on exercise have been known since the days that galley slaves were forced to row to the rhythm of drum beats.
But it's only in the past decade that this has been scientifically demonstrated.
Music boosts performance in a number of ways, he says.
"If you synchronise whatever activity you're engaging in to the tempo of music there's a very clearly energic effect," he says.
"In other words, if you play music with a fast tempo, people work harder."
Music also acts as a mood enhancer, which can put athletes in a "winning" mood, he says.
Music like Eye of the Tiger and the theme from Rocky are classics.
Whitney Houston's One Moment in Time was a particular favourite with certain members of the Australian team during the Sydney Olympics who saw it as reflecting their personal goal to 'seize their moment'.
"It's a bit cheesy but a number of people really bought into it and the lyrics supported what they were about," he says.
But music choices can sometimes be counterintuitive, he says, citing a super heavyweight boxer who liked to listen to classical Japanese music before getting into the ring.
Terry says a computer company has already entered a deal with a sportswear manufacturer to produce an armband you can slip your mp3 player into.
Also in the pipeline are shoes with sensors that pick up how fast you're going and coordinate the beat of the music to ensure you maintain the pace.
He also says being able to download music has made it easier for athletes to come up with music that's highly personalised to their individual training and competing program.
In 1998 Haile Gebreselasie set an indoor world record for the 2000 metres by synchronising his stride rate to the song Scatman.
"At the moment the attitude towards that is that it's almost cheating, and that's because that synchronous effect is so well understood" Terry says. 
The question of cheating may become even more fraught with the prospect of tiny mp3 players that can be worn under the skin.
"People are already having implants for contraception, why not for performance?" Terry says.
"I think there's a whole new world possible as microtechnology develops."

Australian diggers in the trenches of Gallipoli in 1915
Australia is to be part of a major three-nation archaeological survey of the Gallipoli battlefield, researchers say.
Associate Professor Chris Mackie from the University of Melbourne says the survey will combine conventional mapping with electromagnetic surveying to produce the most comprehensive historical and archaeological study ever conducted there.
"Most of the attention in the post-war period has been on the cemeteries," he says about studies of Turkey's Gallipoli Peninsula.
"One of the things we'll be spending a great deal of time on is the mapping of the trenches to see how they cohere with surviving maps of the trenches and exploring what lies beneath."
Mackie says there's a "distinct possibility" that a wealth of material dating back to the days of antiquity lies buried beneath the battlefield, perhaps the most historically significant military site in Australia's history.
"Records from sappers dating back to 1915 mention ancient pots, ancient remains and so forth, so there could be material there," he says.
"Because we'll be using electromagnetics you're coming up with all sorts of possibilities, everything from material left behind in the battle itself to much older stuff."
The survey, which will be conducted by researchers from Australia, New Zealand and Turkey, will also aim to identify any significant trenches, command posts, outposts and key battle areas, says a spokesperson for the federal department of veterans' affairs.
"Basically [we hope to produce] a catalogue of the ones we know of and also see if there's any ones we weren't aware of," the spokesperson says.
"[The researchers] hope to get together a comprehensive record of sites, gauge their condition and also recommend any ways that we can possibly protect them and enhance them."
Will the site be dug up?
Mackie says because of the historical and cultural sensitivity of the site "there's no intention to embark on any excavation".
The veterans' affairs spokesperson says: "It's going to be fairly comprehensive archaeological historical research."
Mackie says many people are unaware of the historical importance of the region, which includes the nearby site of the ancient battle of Troy.
The project was scheduled to have started earlier this year but has been delayed by diplomatic and heritage considerations, the veterans' affairs spokesperson says.
Remains of diggers found in Belgium
Confirmation of the Gallipoli survey comes as the federal government announces that the remains of what are believed to be five Australian World War I soldiers have been found on the Western Front in Belgium during excavations for a gas line at Frenzenbergstraat in Zonnebeke.
The discovery has been reported to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission and the Office of Australian War Graves is awaiting a full report, says veterans' affairs minister Bruce Billson.
He says the government will attempt to identify the remains once a report is at hand.

The Solar-B mission will measure the movement of magnetic fields and how the Sun's atmosphere responds to them
Scientists will launch a new space mission later this week to study the most violent explosions in the solar system.
By monitoring the Sun's magnetic field the Solar-B mission, a UK, US and Japanese collaboration, hopes to learn more about solar flares.
These bursts of energy are equivalent to tens of millions of hydrogen bombs exploding in a matter of minutes, the scientists say.
"What we want to do is explore the most energetic explosions in the solar system so we can actually predict when they will occur and why they happen," Professor Louise Harra, of University College London's Mullard Space Science Laboratory, told a recent conference. 
Instruments on the spacecraft will measure the movement of magnetic fields and how the Sun's atmosphere responds to them. 
The mission will focus on solar flares' trigger phase. 
Solar flares occur when energy stored in twisted magnetic fields is suddenly released. And the largest flares occur where there are the strongest magnetic fields.
Flares are usually associated with sunspots, dark cool areas caused by intense magnetic fields breaking through the Sun's surface.
They pose a danger to astronauts and spacecraft and can cause havoc with satellite links, power grids and mobile phone networks on Earth. 
"Solar flares are fast and furious. They can cause communication blackouts on Earth within 30 minutes of a flare erupting on the Sun's surface," says Harra. 
"In terms of heat it is 10,000 times hotter than a volcanic eruption," she added in a briefing at the recent British Association for the Advancement of Science festival.
The heat generated by a solar flare, first observed in England in 1859, causes atmospheric gases to start to move at enormous speeds, more than 10 times faster than the speed of Concorde.
Solar-B is set to launch on Saturday morning Australia time (late Friday UTC) from the Uchinoura Space Centre in southern Japan.
During its three-year mission it will orbit at an altitude of 600 kilometres to get a continuous view of the Sun.
Harra says a better understanding of solar flares could provide information about how magnetic fields release huge amounts of energy and whether life can exist somewhere else.

The king protea, one of the largest of all South African proteas, is related to proteas throughout the southern hemisphere
The protea family spread through the southern hemisphere by riding on fragments of the ancient supercontinent Gondwana, according to a scientist who says his research deals a blow to intelligent design.
Australia's Dr Peter Weston, the principle research scientist at the National Herbarium of New South Wales, has been researching the biogeography of the family Proteaceae.
The family is common in Australia and includes waratahs, grevilleas, proteas, banksias and even macadamia trees.
Varieties are also found in South Africa, Southeast Asia, New Guinea, New Caledonia, New Zealand and Madagascar.
"Most of the areas in which they grow are pieces of ... Gondwana that started fragmenting hundreds of millions of years ago," Weston says.
"After [the idea of] continental drift became accepted in the late 1960s and early 1970s it also became accepted that the Proteaceae became primarily distributed as a result of continental drift."
Weston is looking at how species spread to different parts of the world and evolveed, and is using molecular dating, to support this hypothesis.
He will discuss his latest research in an Australian Academy of Science lecture in Canberra next month.
For example, he says his analysis shows that the ancestors of the Sydney waratah come from northern Queensland, New Guinea and as far as Peru, Ecuador, Chile and Argentina.
The research supports Darwin's theory of evolution as opposed to the view that everything was simultaneously created by an intelligent designer, Weston says.
"Life on Earth has evolved together so we've got a narrative of the history of the Earth and we've got a comparable story about the history of these plants," he says.
"If these plants hadn't evolved why would you expect this degree of agreement?"
But molecular dating by Weston and colleagues at Rhodes University in South Africa has come up with some surprises when compared with geological data on continental drift.
For example, some groups of protea found both in Australia and Africa have been dated at about 40 million years old, millions of years after Gondwana split.
This makes them too young to have arrived by continental drift because according to geological records the last time Africa was connected to the rest of Gondwana was more than 100 million years ago.
So, how did they arrive in Australia?
Weston says some protea seeds are light and aerodynamic, making it likely they were distributed on the wind.
The strange case of the macadamia tree
But more puzzling is the strange case of the macadamia.
Molecular dating shows the variety found in Africa's Western Cape split from the Australian variety about 50 million years, or 50 million years after the accepted time of continental fragmentation.
Because macadamia nuts are heavy and rock-like, it's unlikely they were carried by the wind or even floated across the ocean, Weston says.
The split also predates humans, ruling out that they were distributed by hand.
"I find it hard to explain," he admits.
Weston says while Darwin believed biogeography was a crucial test of evolution, the great naturalist didn't support continental instability.
But his friend, the British botanist Joseph Hooker, suggested as early as 1853 that Proteaceae in southern continents must have achieved their distribution through climatic and geographic conditions.

Genes influence how you learn to read and spell
The genes involved in learning to sound out words are different from the ones involved in learning to recognise words by sight, according to an Australian study.
The finding, published online in the journal Reading and Writing, adds fuel to the debate about the best way of teaching children to read.
There are two particular skills that children need to learn if they are going to be good readers.
The first is the sounding out process, known as phonics.
The other skill is being able to recognise familiar words pretty much by sight. This helps when they read words such as 'yacht' that don't follow the phonics rule.
Researchers including Associate Professor Anne Castles, from the University of Melbourne, tested different genetic models for reading and spelling in 691 sets of identical and non-identical twins to determine to what extent these skills are genetically based. 
Twins are ideal for this type of research because identical twins are more similar genetically than non-identical twins.
So if a skill has a genetic basis, identical twins tend to be more similar to each other than non-identical twins.
The researchers found that both reading and spelling skills do have a genetic basis, although a child's environment is also important.
"Not all of that skill is something you are born with, but there is a genetic component," Castles says.
The particularly novel thing about this study is that different sets of genes seem to be involved to some degree for those different processes.
"So the genes for learning to sound words out are different from the ones that are involved in learning to recognise words by sight. But certainly many genes were shared in common as well."
A second finding is that reading and spelling have a common genetic basis, meaning that if children are having difficulty spelling they will also be likely to struggle with learning to read. 
Castles says the research has implications for future research into reading and spelling. 
"The existence of different reading sub-skills, with different genetic bases, needs to be reflected in our theories of reading and its acquisition," she says.

The next time you go to a sports game at a large open-air stadium, listen to the weather forecast, say meteorologists
Large open-air stadiums could be severe weather death traps, says a US meteorologist in a new study on lightning storms and sports stadiums.
Few people have been struck by lightning in stadiums and no US stadium has suffered a direct tornado hit during a game.
But the University of Colorado scientist says stadiums are not immune to these dangers and stadium managers can do something to prevent a calamity.
The most infamous case of a poorly handled lightning storm at a big stadium was the 1998 Virginia Tech game at RKF Stadium in Washington DC, reports Joel Gratz in the September issue of the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society.
Lightning struck and killed one woman and caused numerous injuries when 50,000 people panicked and raced chaotically to escape the stadium through narrow tunnels. 
The stadium's jammed tunnels left many people in the open without protection. 
During the next 10 minutes there were 16 more lightning strikes within a mile of the stadium, says Gratz.
What went wrong? Stadium managers had no plan, police and ushers were unprepared to help people find cover, the stadium speaker system was inadequate and there was no lightning evacuation plan, says Gratz.
Ironically, the reason there are no lightning plans is simple: the odds are miniscule that lightning will strike in a stadium just when a game is under way, Gratz says.
"Statistically it may not make a lot of sense to look into it," says Gratz. But then again, he points out, odds are also very low of a terrorist attacks at any given stadium, yet there are plans in place for that.
"Lightning is also one of those low-risk, but high-impact events."
You can't just activate your terrorist plan when a lightning storm approaches and expect it to help, Gratz explains. 
"Unlike a terrorist threat, moving people into the [carpark] or open field during an electrical storm will probably hurt people," he says.
What's needed are evacuation plans that use the most lightning-protected places inside a stadium, nearby buildings, as well as better monitoring of the approaching weather by stadium officials, he says.
Spectators themselves can prevent trouble too by paying better attention to severe weather warnings and acting on them, says meteorologist Professor William Gallus of Iowa State University.
Gallus got a first-hand look at how tricky severe weather warnings and stadiums can be when a tornado threatened the Jack Trice Stadium in Ames, Iowa last November.
"When this tornado touched down it was 15 miles [24 kilometres] away, it was live on TV," says Gallus.
"Tailgaters [in the stadium carpark] were watching it" on portable televisions, he says.
Yet there was little comprehension among spectators or stadium officials that at 80 kilometres per hour, the tornado could potentially reach the stadium in just minutes.
"This event could have been such a tragedy," says Gallus. 
Fortunately, the tornado did not hit the stadium this time.
"People need to realise they need to take personal responsibility for their safety," he says.
There is, indeed, a certain tendency for spectators to put on blinkers, Gratz says.
"When you go into a stadium as a spectator people have weather information on PDAs and cell phones, but no one is really going to notice with the bright lights and game that there is an electrical storm 15 miles away."
Gratz admits he has fallen prey to this blindness. He was at a game at Denver's Invesco Stadium when his father called his mobile phone and asked him why, if he was such a knowledgeable weather person, was he sitting out in the open at a stadium along with 50,000 other people when a nasty electrical storm was closing in?
"It was fatherly wisdom," recalls Gratz. And it's exactly what got him interested in whether stadium management was really prepared.

The fossil child has been named Selam, which means peace in Ethiopia's official Amharic language
A 3.3 million-year-old skeleton of the earliest child ever found shows the ancient ancestor of modern humans walked upright but may also have climbed trees, scientists say. 
They found the well-preserved remains of a three-year-old girl of the species Australopithecus afarensis, which includes the fossil skeleton known as Lucy, in the Dikika area of Ethiopia.
"It represents the earliest and most complete partial skeleton of a child ever found in the history of palaeoanthropology," says Dr Zeresenay Alemseged, of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany. 
The skull, torso and upper and lower limbs, including the hand, show both human and ape-like features, the scientists report in the latest issue of the journal Nature.
The state of the ancient bones, found 400 kilometres northeast of the capital Addis Ababa, suggest she was buried in a flood, which may also have caused her death. 
The remains provide the first evidence of what babies of early human ancestors looked like. The nearly complete skeleton will also provide information about the child's height and structure. 
"This child will help us understand a lot about the species to which it belongs," says Alemseged, leader of the international team of scientists.
"The lower part of the body, which includes the foot, the shin bone and the thigh bone clearly shows us that this species was an upright walking creature," he says. 
But some of the features from the upper part of the body, including the shoulder blade and arms are more ape-like.
The fingers are long and curved which suggest she might have been able to swing through trees. 
"The finding is the most complete hominid skeleton ever found in the world," says Alemseged.
He says the fossil was older than the 3.2-million-year-old remains of Lucy discovered in 1974, described by scientists as one of the world's greatest archaeological finds.
"The new bones belong to a three-year-old girl who lived 3.3 million years ago, 150,000 years before Lucy," Alemseged says. 
The fossil has been named Selam, which means peace in Ethiopia's official Amharic language.
Dr Simon Underdown of Oxford Brookes University in England describes it as a massively exciting discovery of a juvenile Lucy.
"This tremendous fossil will make us challenge many of the ideas we have about how and why we came to walk on two feet," he says. 
An analysis of the sediment in which the remains were found enabled researchers to build a picture of the type of environment in which the child lived. 
It was a lush area with flowing water, forests and grassland, which was also affected by volcanic eruptions. The range of habitats was suitable for hippos, crocodiles and relatives of the wildebeest.
"We can see from the sediment that the region was very much characterised by a mosaic of environment that ranged from forests and woodlands near the rivers, to seasonally flooded grasslands to a flood plain that would have supported more open vegetation," says Dr Jonathan Wynn of the University of South Florida, who dated the sediments surrounding the remains.
Australopithecus
Once thought by some to be our ancestor, A. afarensis is now widely considered to be a failed branch of the human tree, for many experts suspect the hominid was anatomically far closer to apes than humans. 
Its brain, adjusted to its body size, was not much larger than that of a chimpanzee and although it no longer had the large canines that distinguished apes from hominids, it had relatively large chewing teeth that were still primitive. 
The other comparably complete infant hominid skeleton in the fossil record is that of a Neanderthal child who lived less than 100,000 years ago.

Could you be churning out your own car from a desktop factory in 15 years?
Within 15 years, desktop nanofactories could pump out anything from a new car to a novel nanoweapon, says a technology commentator.
And he warns that society needs to start preparing for this brave new world.
Mike Treder from the Center for Responsible Nanotechnology (CRN) in New York says advanced nanotechnology, like these nanofactories, could help solve world poverty but it could also wreak economic and social chaos.
"It's the biggest challenge we've ever faced as a species," says Treder, who has been addressing scientists in Australia this week.
CRN is a non-profit organisation advised among others by the so-called father of nanotechnology, Dr Eric Drexler.
The organisation says it aims to raise awareness about the benefits and dangers of molecular manufacturing, the precise assembly of products atom-by-atom.
While molecular manufacturing is not yet a reality, Treder says researchers are already working on building molecular-scale machines that could eventually move atoms around to make products. 
And he says that in less than 15 years, nanoscale factories could be making consumer products from cups and chairs to cars and house bricks. 
Raw materials like carbon would be pumped into the nanofactory, where atoms would be rearranged to make products according to programs downloaded from the internet, says Treder.
Warnings
Treder says such desktop nanofactories could help reduce poverty and starvation in developing nations, and provide tremendous medical benefits. But society needs to guard against its potential risks.
In particular, he says CRN is concerned that these desktop nanofactories would lead to a nano "arms race" in which hard-to-detect nanoweapons could be designed, manufactured and tested much quicker than they are today.
"Imagine a suitcase filled with billions of toxin-carrying flying robots that could be released anywhere to target a population," he says.
"You could make a suitcase full of these things overnight for a few dollars."
The mass production of consumer goods by private desktop factories could also trigger social chaos due to economic disruption, says Treder.
"If I can make my own car at home for a couple of hundred dollars with a design downloaded from the internet that means I'm not a customer of the auto dealer down the road."
Waste from such easy manufacturing, or nanolitter, is another issue that needs to be thought about, he says. As is the prospect of nanospam.

Flying foxes reportedly flew away from the storm, probably in response to rapidly dropping air pressure
Cyclone Larry, which hit Australia's northeast in March, has scattered 10,000 flying foxes far and wide, says a zoologist.
And CSIRO's Dr Louise Shilton needs to find this local species of crow-sized, fruit-eating bat quickly.
The event is both good and bad for her ongoing project to monitor the usually poorly distributed animals. 
It's bad news because it's rather difficult to study animals you can't find. 
"We need to be providing the best possible population data and we can't monitor them without knowing where they roost," says Shilton.
Among her questions are what they are eating and where they have chosen to roost.
The good news is that when she finds them, she'll probably be able to learn what these animals regard as good habitat, a matter of debate at the moment, she says.
Do they really depend solely on undisturbed forest or do they like urban areas where fruit trees are irrigated and predators are few? 
It's the sort of thing people who love, and those who loathe, flying foxes want to know. 
"There's this kind of love-hate relationship with fruit bats in Australia," says Shilton. 
Some people adore them and point to evidence that flying foxes play a critical role in pollinating and spreading the seeds of native plants. Others are less enthusiastic.
"They do come into contact with fruit growers," says Shilton. "But they also come into conflict with people in urban environments."
That's because the bats congregate in large noisy crowds and produce foul-smelling guano.
The animosity was bad enough that it was once common for people to shoot flying foxes. Now, however, the local northern Queensland species is protected and a permit is required to kill them.
"This particular species is the one with the smallest distribution and it is believed to have the smallest population," Shilton says.
Scattered or killed?
Shilton is pretty certain the bats were scattered rather than killed by the cyclone, because she visited known roosting sites and found few dead animals, "just a handful compared to the 10,000 that had been around before the storm". 
And some people reported seeing the bats hurrying away en masse before the storm arrived, probably a natural response to quickly dropping air pressure. 
"I would agree that Queensland probably does offer more places for the flying foxes to escape the storm," says Dr Kim McConkey, a wildlife researcher who studied the effects of another cyclone on another species of flying foxes in Tonga.
"We recorded an 80% decline in flying fox abundance in Tonga after the cyclone, and this was almost certainly due to mortality, either directly during the storm or afterwards due to a lack of food" and human hunting, she adds. 
McConkey's colleagues also reported seeing bat carcasses in the lagoon after the island cyclone, she says. 
Out in daylight
To find out where the Queensland bats are, Shilton has asked the public to call her with information. Already, she says, there are sightings of flying foxes heading out for food in daylight, an unusual behaviour for the nocturnal animal. 
That information alone suggests some bats are finding food scarce and working harder to get a meal.
Meanwhile, says Shilton, anyone cheering at the flying foxes' disappearance shouldn't assume they have disappeared for good.
"I've personally got no doubt that once the native trees come into season the bats will come back," Shilton says.

Driveways, roads and patios make up 60% of impermeable urban surfaces. So why not harvest that water rather than let it run away?
Carparks, patios and other paved areas could one day collect rainwater, purify it then channel it to underground tanks for reuse, say researchers.
Special porous pavers made of concrete containing specific additives would purify the polluted run-off, says Professor Simon Beecham, a civil engineer from the University of South Australia.
The water could then be captured in large underground tanks and be used for irrigation, cleaning and flushing the toilet, he says.
"We're trying to harvest a resource that we've not been able to tap into before," says Beecham.
Roads, driveways, pathways and the like make up 60% of impervious urban surfaces. And run-off from them causes flooding and pollutes our waterways.
Until now harvesting rainwater from them has proved more difficult than from roofs, says Beecham.
His team is developing a system in which porous concrete pavers allows run-off to seep into underground tanks made of galvanised metal or a flexible plastic lining filled with gravel.
A special bonding material ensures the porous pavers are strong enough to withstand the heavy weight of cars and trucks.
And additives mixed into the pavers, or into the sand and gravel bedding material beneath them, enables the system to trap pollutants.
A paver injected with ferrous hydroxide, for example, traps toxic and persistent heavy metals like lead, zinc and cadmium that come from sources such as car tyres, brake-linings and exhaust.
A layer of microbes on fabric beneath the pavers can trap and degrade hydrocarbons such as oil.
And a layer of granulated activated carbon traps dissolved organic matter from leaf litter that is responsible for algal blooms in rivers, says Beecham.
He says the pollutants can accumulate in the pavers over 25 to 30 years, allowing usable water to be caught and pumped above ground for reuse.
He says the pavers could also allow trees, which themselves soak up and recycle water, to grow more freely because their roots have access to more water and air.
Problem tree roots could be avoided by using a special concrete device that directs the roots away from the pavers, he says.
And the pavers could be seeded with low maintenance native vegetation including sedges.
Beecham says one of his PhD students Baden Myers is about to construct a full-scale prototype of the complete water harvesting and reuse system, which he predicts will cost 10 to 30% more than conventional paving.
Part of the research has been submitted to Water Management, a journal of the UK's Institution of Civil Engineers.
The South Australian government water authority SA Water is a major source of finance for the research.

People who prefer old technology to new may form a new cultural group, just as they have done in history
An underclass of internet 'refuseniks' may be breeding and planning terrorist acts in coming years to protest against technology, according to a survey.
The poll by the Pew Internet and  American Life Project, an independent think tank, asked people what they thought of the effect of the internet on social, political and economic life in the year 2020.
A total of 742 technology thinkers and stakeholders took part in the online survey.
And a majority (58%) agreed with predictions that refuseniks will emerge as a cultural group characterised by their choice to live off the network and that some will resort to terror acts in protest against technology. 
A total of 35% of respondents disagreed with that scenario and 7% had no opinion.
"Constant change will spook some into trying to slow everyone down through horrific and catastrophic terrorist attacks against the information infrastructure and all who rely upon it," says Sean Mead, of Interbrand Analytics, who took part in the survey.
Another respondent, Ed Lyell, an expert on the internet and education, says today's 'ecoterrorists' are the harbingers of this likely trend. 
"Every age has a small percentage that cling to an overrated past of low technology, low energy lifestyle," he writes.
"Led by people who only know the idealised past, not the reality of often painful past life styles, these Luddites will use violence to seek to stop even very positive progress."
But some respondents warn against quickly applying labels to those who question the advance of technology.
"We need some strong dissenting voices about the impact of this technology in our lives," writes Denzil Meyers of Widgetwonder.
"So far, it's been mostly the promise of a cure-all, just like the past Industrial Revolution." 
The survey, which was conducted with North Carolina's Elon University, also found that a majority of internet leaders, activists and analysts questioned agree with predictions that by 2020:
&#149; A global, low-cost network will be thriving and mobile communications will be available to anyone anywhere at low cost 
&#149; English will be a universal language of global communication but other languages, such as Mandarin, could grow in prominence
&#149; Virtual reality on the internet will lead to more productivity but will also spawn new addiction problems
&#149; Humans will remain in charge of technology, even as more activity is automated and 'smart agents' proliferate, and
&#149; People will wittingly or unwittingly disclose more about themselves, gaining some benefits in the process even as they lose some privacy.
"Many of these respondents knew from history and personal experience that technologies can have good and bad effects," says Lee Rainie, director of the Pew project.
"I come away with a sense that the future is still up for grabs, even as everyone agrees that it will be very different from today."

New research suggests that a fall in methane emissions, partly attributed to diminishing wetlands, was only temporary
China's booming economy and the wetlands of the northern hemisphere have emerged as key factors in what could be a future escalation in emissions of the greenhouse gas methane, according to new research.
A study of methane emissions published in the journal Nature today reports that atmospheric methane has increased over the past seven years after dropping during the 1990s.
The paper says China's growing economy, including its flourishing coal industry, may be behind an increase in methane emissions from human activity.
But this has been offset by a drop in natural emissions from swamps, bogs and wetlands, which are drying out as a result of prolonged drought.
"If the drying trend is reversed and emissions from wetlands return to normal, atmospheric methane levels may increase again, worsening the problem of climate change," says one of the report's authors, Australian researcher Dr Paul Steele.
Steele, a senior research scientist at CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, says the paper isn't making any firm predictions.
"But we are pointing to the prospect [that emissions will increase]" he says.
The methane menace
Steele says methane is the second most important greenhouse gas after carbon dioxide.
Some 6 million tonnes of methane are emitted into the air each year, although the atmosphere can rid itself of some of this through chemical processes, including the oxidative effects of hydroxyl radicals.
Methane can be emitted as a result of natural or human activity. The primary natural source of methane is rotting wetland vegetation and belching by sheep and cattle.
It's also produced by decaying landfill and exploitation of fossil fuels, including drilling for oil and coal mining.
Captured and marketed, methane can be turned into an alternative energy source, but poorly managed it escapes into the atmosphere where it can contribute to global warming.
It's estimated to have been responsible for a fifth of the enhanced greenhouse effect over the past 200 years, Steele says.
He says it's unclear how much atmospheric methane comes from natural sources and how much from human activity.
"We might know the total fairly well but we don't have a very good handle on how to partition the total amongst the range of sources," he says.
But in an accompanying editorial Dr Jos Lelieveld, director of the Max Planck Institute for Chemistry in Germany, says about two-thirds of global methane currently comes from human activity.
He says atmospheric methane grew at a rate of more than 10% per decade before 1980 but dropped to almost zero by the 1990s.
Coal mines and wetlands
Steele says one of the effects of prolonged drought has been a drying up of wetlands, particularly in the northern hemisphere.
"Bogs and swamps emit methane because they've got all this rotting decaying vegetation at the base of the water," he says.
"If they dry up, then the emission of methane stops or slows down." 
The economic growth and coal mining activity of Asian countries like China, largely driven by the hunger for electricity, appears to be making up for any deficit.
"Coal mining can release methane to the atmosphere without safeguards," Steele says.
"We don't know if they're being applied [in China's mines] and to which effect."

This new image of the 'Face on Mars' shows a remnant massif thought to have formed via landslides and debris
The famous 'Face on Mars', seen by some as evidence of intelligent life on the Red Planet, can now be seen close up.
The European Space Agency has released new detailed images of the controversial, face-like formation first captured by a Viking orbiter at the Cydonia region of Mars in 1976.
The face may be a popular target for orbiters - NASA's Mars Global Surveyor snapped images in 1998 and 2001 - but it's not an easy one.
The site, located at 41&deg; north Martian latitude, is often obscured by atmospheric dust and haze.
Still, after several attempts, the High Resolution Stereo Camera on board ESA's Mars Express captured a series of images with a ground resolution of approximately 13.7 metres per pixel.
"These images of the Cydonia region on Mars are truly spectacular," says Dr Agustin Chicarro, ESA Mars Express project scientist.
"They not only provide a completely fresh and detailed view of an area famous to fans of space myths worldwide, but also provide an impressive close-up over an area of great interest for planetary geologists."
Chicarro and his team say the high-resolution images further confirm what NASA scientists have been saying for years: it's not a face, but a raised, eroded surface.
NASA's chief scientist for Mars exploration Dr Jim Garvin describes the formation as the equivalent of a butte or mesa.
Such formations are common in the Mars region of Cydonia, which is located between the planet's southern highlands and northern plains.
Convincing the true believers
But then, some may never be convinced.
Since the spooky, face-like structure was first photographed by NASA's Viking 1 Orbiter 30 years ago, the site has been the subject of breathless speculation.
In movies, books and on the web, some have argued this is a massive sculpture built by intelligent life and that surrounding conical-like structures are pyramids, or remnants of a great city, built by a complex civilisation.
Attempts to say the face is just an accident of geology are often met by claims that scientists have something to hide.
For example, in response to the NASA images released in 2001, web author Richard Hoagland retorted:
"The reality is that it is highly unlikely that any of us would recognise a picture of our own grandmother if it was stretched horizontally, flattened, compressed and shown upside down. So of course it doesn't look much like a face."
'Skull' on Mars
In addition to the well-known face and 'pyramids' in the region, a previously unseen skull-shaped structure also appears in some of the new Mars Express images.
Some may be eager to offer up theories to explain this new site.
Garvin, for his part, doesn't want to discourage anyone from coming up with their own explanations.
"Please realise that as a scientist of Martian landscapes, my position is that of a traditional scientist, and requires that I utilise the paradigms associated with multiple-working hypotheses grounded in the physics of landscape development," he says.
"Other opinions on the basis of other approaches are of course welcome and encouraged."
Alien face or eroded surface, the face on Mars is of interest to planetary geologists like Garvin and these latest images reveal new geological details.
The latest images show the beginnings of what are called debris aprons, or gentle landslides, surrounding hills. Since the debris apron around the face is minor, the scientists suggest former, larger debris aprons may have been covered by lava flows.
Meanwhile, the photographs show that the western wall of the face appears to have moved down as a huge mass. The same massive rock movements can be seen at the base of the surrounding pyramid-like formations.
As for the skull-like formation, Chicarro and his team suggest this is the remnant of an eroded massif. That's their theory, at least.

Dogs like sports celebrities too. They watch other dogs 'play fight' then hang out with the winners
Dogs seem to enjoy watching other dogs compete against each other and gravitate towards the winners at the end of the game, according to a recent study.
The UK researchers, who publish their research in the journal Animal Behaviour, believe their discovery is the first demonstration of any animal eavesdropping play.
In this case, dogs appear to gain information about another dog or human's social status and ability just by watching that individual compete.
Pooches excitedly rush toward victors when games finish, not unlike enthusiastic human sports fans at a stadium.
"I believe that within the context of a game, dogs prefer winners because they are likely to be a fun and effective partner with which to play," says lead author Dr Nicola Rooney.
"One plausible function of play is that it serves as a 'safe context' in which to test one's own competitive ability. An animal will learn more from playing with an able partner than with a lower quality one," adds Rooney, a researcher in the Anthrozoology Institute at the University of Bristol.
She and colleague Dr John Bradshaw studied 18 canine spectators in a group that included labrador retrievers, springer spaniels and one golden retriever.
In an initial experiment, a dog was matched with a human competitor in a tug of war contest over a knotted rope toy. Each of the canine spectators was brought in on a leash to view matches.
For some games, the human competitor made it clear that he or she was playing by performing moves that dogs seem to associate with playtime. 
These include play bows, where the person gets down on all fours with their forequarters lowered and arms outstretched; forward lunges, where the individual makes sudden, yet non-threatening, movements toward the dog competitor; and feet shuffling, which involves rapid movement of the feet while in a standing position.
After such competitions, the spectator canine would rapidly approach the human or doggy winner with a cheerful gait holding its ears and tail up, signifying a desire to interact with the victor.
When playful moves were omitted from matches, dogs were not as attracted to winners, since they probably thought the games were real competitions and the winner might pose a threat.
During a follow-up experiment, Rooney and Bradshaw repeated the first part of the study, only this time the spectator dog was confined to a crate and only heard the proceedings. 
After matches, the listeners still gravitated toward the winner, which suggests that audio cues, and possibly other as-yet unidentified cues such as smells, might also allow dogs to identify winners and losers.
The research was partly funded by the Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition, the research centre of a popular pet food company.
In related research, the scientists also determine that dogs like to win games, and that winning seems to improve the animals' social skills, such as their "playful attention-seeking behaviours", Rooney says.
She therefore advises that dog owners allow their pets to win at least some games, so long as play signals are included in the competitions.
But not everyone loves a winner. Studies over the past decade on Siamese fighting fish show that fish watching battles are more likely to approach losers than winners, probably because they view the winners as possible rivals.

Characters from Star Trek had similar adventures to the heroes of ancient mythology
Star Trek heralded real developments in science and drew on the great classical myths, an Australian researcher says.
Dr Djoymi Baker, a self-confessed Trekkie from the University of Melbourne, watched more than 700 episodes of the cult TV series as part of her PhD.
Baker, an expert in media and popular culture, says scientists often dismiss science fiction for getting it wrong.
But she says it can foreshadow or even influence developments in science, adding that more members of the public watch science fiction than "science factual".
"Because it's gone on for so many decades [Star Trek has] had a big impact on what people think about space and what might be possible in the future," she says.
"A lot of NASA astronauts cite it as their inspiration; scientists have cited it as their inspiration for new technology."
For example, NASA's first shuttle of 1977 was named Enterprise after a campaign by Star Trek fans.
The Star Trek influence can also be seen in new 'spray on' drug delivery technologies, the computer chip and even the flip-top mobile phone and automatic doors, she says.
And after the catchphrase "beam me up Scotty", scientists have started to experiment with dematerialising and rematerialising helium, and 'cloning' laser beams.
"They can't beam you up yet but they're starting to do experiments along those lines," Baker says.
While Star Trek described life in the future, it also had what is now regarded as a quaint pre-Copernican tendency to place humans at the centre of the universe, she says.
Back to the future
Baker says Star Trek still holds a huge fascination even as space authorities like NASA fight for funds, recognition and good publicity.
"Scientists often don't like science fiction because it can get it wrong, but on the other hand it can be very inspirational," she says.
"NASA might be struggling [but] on the other hand we have science fiction which says we can achieve great things in space, not only in terms of exploration but in terms of what sort of race we want to be, and that's quite a powerful message."
Baker says Star Trek not only looks forward to the technological future, but harks back to the heroic past of ancient myths like Homer's Odyssey.
Not only do mythical figures like the Amazons, the god Apollo or the sirens of Homeric lore appear in space, but Star Trek contains the sweeping themes of intrepid adventure and bold exploration that lie at the heart of classical mythology.
"Mythology is a bit of a recurring theme in science fiction television shows," Baker says.
"Just as you might have met strange creatures in an ancient myth, instead you find strange creatures in outer space."
Shows like Star Trek were also an indirect offshoot from the great cinematic "sword and sandal" epics of the 1950s and 60s, she says.
"Mostly TV was constrained by much tighter budgets so it just couldn't do those types of spectacles," she says.
"So myth goes into other genres and one of the genres ... is science fiction.
"Instead of going into the ancient past, you fast forward into the future."

Higher temperatures may change the strength of El Ni&ntilde;os, scientists report
Earth may be close to the warmest it has been in the past million years, especially in the part of the Pacific Ocean where potentially violent El Ni&ntilde;o weather patterns are born, climate scientists report. 
This doesn't necessarily mean there will be more frequent El Ni&ntilde;os, which can disrupt normal weather around the world. 
But it could mean that these wild patterns will be stronger when they occur, says Dr James Hansen of NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies.
The El Ni&ntilde;o phenomenon is an important factor in monitoring global warming, according to a paper by Hansen and colleagues in the current issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
El Ni&ntilde;os can push temperatures higher than they might ordinarily be. This happened in 1998 when a so-called super-El Ni&ntilde;o helped to heat the Earth to the highest since records began.
What is significant, the scientists write, is that 2005 is in the same temperature range as 1998, and was among the warmest year ever on record, with no sign of the warm surface water in the eastern equatorial Pacific typical of an El Ni&ntilde;o.
The waters of the western equatorial Pacific are warmer than in the eastern equatorial Pacific, and the difference in temperature between these two areas could produce greater temperature swings between the normal weather pattern and El Ni&ntilde;o, they write. 
They blame this phenomenon on climate change, which they say is affecting the surface of the western Pacific before it affects the deeper water. 
El Ni&ntilde;o and climate change
Overall, Earth is within 1&deg;C of its highest temperature levels in the past million years, Hansen and the others write.
They note a recent steep rise in average temperatures, with global surface temperatures increasing about 0.2&deg;C for each of the past three decades. 
Many scientists attribute this rise to human activities, notably the release into the atmosphere of greenhouse gases that let in sunlight and trap its heat like the glass walls of a greenhouse.
Human-caused global warming influences El Ni&ntilde;os much as it sways tropical storms, the scientists write. 
"The effect on frequency of either phenomenon is unclear, depending on many factors, but the intensity of the most powerful events is likely to increase as greenhouse gases increase," they write.
"Slowing the growth rate of greenhouse gases should diminish the probability of both super-El Ni&ntilde;os and the most intense tropical storms."

In an example of collaborative Middle East science, Israeli and Palestinian researchers are changing female Nile tilapia fish into males to boost food supplies
Researchers in Israel, the Palestinian territories and Germany want to transform female freshwater fish into males, a sex change they hope will put bigger fish on the dinner table. 
Male fish are larger, grow faster and weigh about a third more than females, says Assistant Professor Mutaz Qutob, a Palestinian researcher involved in the experiments.
As part of a project with Hebrew University of Jerusalem and Germany's University of Hohenheim, Qutob and his colleagues will inject compounds from plants found in the occupied West Bank and often used as seasonings into food fed to newborn Nile tilapia fish. 
"This will have an effect on the fish's metabolic [structure]. It may shift from female to male," says Qutob, a chemist at al-Quds University in East Jerusalem. 
"This is a very important project. We are introducing a new food source for the Palestinians." 
Scientists at Hebrew University have previously used synthetic steroids, which are regarded as less healthy, to create male fish, says Dr Berta Sivan, a researcher at the Israeli university, which helped found the project. 
Palestinians in the West Bank import most of their fish from Israel and the coastal Gaza Strip. 
But their consumption of fish, especially those from freshwater sources, has fallen in recent years due to rising costs and tighter Israeli travel and trade restrictions on Palestinians. 
"We wanted to solve a fish-breeding problem in Israel and help bring in and promote fish consumption in the Palestinian Authority," Sivan says. 
While Israel has been building a controversial separation barrier in the West Bank, cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian academics has been growing over the past few years despite a Palestinian uprising that began in 2000.
"Israelis and Palestinians who cooperate on research tend to try to work harder during politically critical times," says Professor Hassan Dweik, a co-director of the Israeli-Palestinian Science Organization, which helps find funding for such studies. 
The organisation this year received 74 proposals for academic projects to be conducted by Israeli and Palestinian researchers on topics related to agriculture, education, the environment and medicine. 
Israelis and Palestinians usually conduct their research separately and discuss it by phone or online due to the Israeli travel restrictions that also ban most Israelis from entering Palestinian-controlled areas.

This contour map, which illustrates the shape of the poplar panel on which the Mona Lisa was painted, shows there is most warping near the left shoulder
Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa originally wore a delicate maternity garment and her hair was gathered up in a bun, 3D imaging shows.
These details, which had disappeared under varnish, have now been revealed using a colour laser scanner that imaged the painting to a resolution finer than the width of a human hair.
Researchers of the National Research Council Canada (NRC) announced their findings this week.
"This is the Mona Lisa as we have never seen her before," says NRC president Dr Pierre Coulombe.
NRC researchers travelled to Paris to conduct the research on probably the Louvre Museum's most viewed painting.
They did this at the request of the French state museum agency's Centre for Research and Restoration.
The 3D scans reveal that the woman with the enigmatic smile was originally painted with her hair tied back in a bun, even though today it appears loose on her shoulders.
The revelation settles an old controversy because only girls or women of bad virtue wore their hair loose in 16th century Italy, says project leader Bruno Mottin from the state museum agency. The real Mona Lisa was a woman of social stature.
One of her garments, similar to fashions that pregnant or nursing women wore in this period, was also lost under yellow varnish and no longer visible to the naked eye, the infrared scans show. 
"This is something that had never been seen until now," Mottin says. 
The real Mona Lisa had three children. Da Vinci was commissioned by wealthy Florentine businessman Francesco del Giocondo to paint his wife between 1503 and 1506 after the birth of their second child.
But da Vinci kept the painting and worked on it until his death, probably changing her hair and other features.
In the original Mona Lisa, the subject gripped her chair more tightly, and she is not resting against the back of her chair, as some believed, but sitting upright, the scans show. 
Researchers also gleaned insights about the da Vinci's painting technique, including his sfumato or smoke technique of soft, heavily shaded modelling, says Mottin. 
"There is no special mystery in the painting like in [Dan Brown's book] The Da Vinci Code," he says.
"But in that painting Leonardo tried to capture the essence of life ... It embodies all his skills ... That is the true mystery we've uncovered." 
Researchers identified a lack of brushstrokes, suggesting that da Vinci may have used his fingers to paint, except there are no fingerprints on the artwork. 
Scans of the Mona Lisa reveal that darker areas, such as the eyes and corners of her smile, are thicker and "composed of a succession of thinly applied glaze layers", says NRC scientist Fran&ccedil;ois Blais. 
But how da Vinci actually applied his layers of pigment and oil medium remains a mystery, he says.
"It's extremely thinly painted and extremely flat, and yet the details of the curls of hair, for example, are extremely distinct. So, the technique is unlike anything we've ever seen before," says John Taylor of the NRC. 
Split in the painting
A 12 centimetre split at the top of the painting, which worried curators, appears to be stable, NRC scientists say.
It was probably caused by the removal of the original frame and repaired between the middle of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, they say. 
Also, the poplar wood panel on which da Vinci painted his masterwork has a convex warp on the middle right side that is 12 millimetres higher  than its surroundings, researchers say. 
But it does not threaten the Mona Lisa smile.
The 3D scans were done over two nights in October 2004 before the painting was placed in a new glass display case at the Louvre. 
The scanner recorded the 3D shape and colour of the painting at a resolution of 60 micrometres and a depth of 10 micrometres.
Mottin says although the Mona Lisa is seen by seven million visitors to the museum a year, scientists have had few opportunities to study her in a laboratory.
They studied her once in the 1930s, in 1952 and now.
"She suffers from her celebrity," he says.
The new images will allow curators to continue their research without touching the canvas, as well as try new restoration techniques on the 3D model before applying them to the actual portrait, says Taylor. 
The Canadian camera technology has been used to scan Michelangelo's statue David and paintings by artists like Renoir and Corot. 
It was also used to create animation for Hollywood movies such as Peter Jackson's Lord of the Rings trilogy and on board the NASA space shuttle Atlantis to examine the changing state of the shuttle's heat tiles during a mission.

Downloading information to your mobile phone may be a case of pointing it at a building and clicking
One day you'll be able to point your mobile phone at a train station, click and download a timetable, or point it at a museum to download a list of exhibits, researchers say.
That's the idea behind Dr Federico Casalegno's Electronic Lens or eLens project at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
You could also use the phone to contribute to conversation threads, similar to those on internet forums, about a particular business or institution.
For example, you could submit or retrieve a movie review at a movie theatre.
"It's a layer of electronic information on physical places," says Casalegno, a research scientist at MIT as well as a user-experience manager at Motorola.
The approach could change both how institutions deliver information to the public and how people interact with public and private businesses in their neighbourhood.
Casalegno's idea for the project began with the metaphor of an electronic lens that, when aimed at a building, could become a kind of viewfinder, making the institution more transparent.
The technology consists of three parts: a barcode-like tag that is placed on places of interest, software called Radioactive that is installed on the mobile phone and the social networking website Constellation.
To use the system, someone would first stick the tag on a building. 
For example, the manager of a movie theatre could stick the tag on the outside of the building, then take a picture of it with a mobile phone.
Next, the manager would launch the Radioactive program, which would ask him or her to name the tag and provide its location. The software automatically locates the tag on a map.
Then, the manager can create a message that contains text, audio, pictures or video.
There could be a tag for each movie playing in the theatre, with each tag hosting a movie trailer with show times.
Viewers with the same software on their phone can access the tag and start a conversation thread with movie reviews.
The manager can also use the Constellation social networking website to give certain groups access to the tags. Perhaps there is a promotional discount for students of a particular university.
More than movies
The technology could work for more than movies. People could place their own tags around town to open up public dialogues about parks or city schools.
They could even use the tags inside a building, such as a hospital, to provide information to select groups, such as doctors, nurses or visitors.
"It's very convincing, this idea of connecting social networks with the mobile community," says Leda Guidi, head of the citizens' communication unit for the City of Bologna, Italy, who organised the country's first free municipal internet network.
Not only does it open up more channels of communication, says Guidi, it could make commerce and government more accessible.
Casalegno has already conducted a user study of 20 people in Spain and is now working on a new version of eLens to be tested by next year with 100 participants in Boston or Chicago.
This could mean that soon, pointing and clicking will not be limited to the laptop.

Artist's impression of the core of the telescope
Australia and Southern Africa have been shortlisted to host a new radio telescope that is 50 times more powerful than any that exist today.
The shortlist for the international Square Kilometre Array (SKA) telescope was announced in The Netherlands this week.
The telescope will use low-frequency radio waves to probe deep into the cosmos and aid the study of pulsars, colliding black holes, dark energy and the influence of magnetic fields on the development of stars and galaxies.
And it will allow detection of any radar signals from extra-terrestrial intelligence that might be lurking in our galaxy.
"It is going to provide us with a whole new window on the universe," says SKA steering committee member Professor Brian Boyle from CSIRO.
The SKA telescope is not a single giant instrument but a set of thousands of antennas spread out in a spiral over 3000 kilometres with antennas at the centre closest together.
In Australia the proposed site for the core of the telescope is at Mileura station, 800 kilometres northeast of Perth in Western Australia. 
Antennas will be distributed across the continent, possibly extending to New Zealand.
In Southern Africa, the core of the telescope would be sited in the Northern Cape region of South Africa with dishes extending to Botswana, Namibia, Mozambique, Madagascar, Mauritius, Kenya and Ghana.
A bid from China was rejected because the proposed site for the core was not flat enough, says Boyle.
And a joint bid from Argentina and Brazil was eliminated because of turbulent ionospheric conditions above South America that would interfere with the low-frequency radio waves used by the SKA.
International committee
Boyle says the shortlist decision was made by the SKA steering committee which has 21 members, including two Australians, one South African and one Chinese member.
The committee oversees and co-ordinates research and will eventually pull together a single design for the telescope.
Although some countries have more members on the committee than others, Boyle says the decision was made on a purely scientific and technical basis.
He also says Australia should be selected as the final site.
"I passionately believe that Australia is the best site for the SKA from a scientific basis," he says.
So far Australia has built a small prototype telescope at the core site, called the Mileura Wide-Field Array, supported by US investment.
The final decision is expected towards the end of the decade and the telescope is expected to cost 1 billion euros (A$1.7 billion) in total.
Despite the tens of millions already spent on developing SKA technology and telescope design in Australia, and even if it isn't the final location, Australia astronomers will still be ahead, Boyle says.
He says the money spent has already improved Australia's radio astronomy capability and the effort has developed Australian expertise in radio telescope design and radio astronomy itself.
And wherever the telescope is built, Boyle says astronomers will be able to access it remotely from their desktop via broadband networks from wherever they are in the world.

Surgeons performing the first zero-gravity operation aboard a plane free-falling to create weightless conditions. They hope this can be a trial run for surgery on astronauts in space
French doctors this week carried out the world's first operation on a human in zero gravity, using a specially adapted aircraft to simulate conditions in space. 
During a three-hour flight from Bordeaux in southwest France, the team of surgeons and anaesthetists successfully removed a benign tumour from the forearm of a 46-year-old volunteer. 
The experiment was part of a program backed by the European Space Agency to develop techniques for performing robotic surgery aboard the International Space Station or at a future Moon base. 
"We weren't trying to perform technical feats but to carry out a feasibility test ... Now we know that a human being can be operated on in space without too many difficulties," says team leader Dr Dominique Martin.
Under normal ground conditions, the operation would be a straightforward procedure performed under a local anaesthetic.
Without gravity, the surgeons' work is harder and the patient's body reacts differently. 
"Cardiac output is reduced, which creates vascular stress. Blood doesn't pump in the same way. Above all it flows out of a wound in spheres, so we had to create a special vacuum aspirator to contain it," Martin told the French newspaper Liberation.
The custom-designed Airbus 300 aircraft, dubbed Zero-G, performed a series of parabolic swoops, creating between 20 seconds of weightlessness at the top of each curve. The process was repeated 32 times.
Strapped inside a custom-made operating block, three surgeons and two anaesthetists worked during these brief bursts, with their instruments held in place with magnets around the patient's stretcher. 
"If we had had two hours of zero gravity at a stretch, we could have removed an appendix," says Martin, head of Bordeaux University Hospital's plastic surgery unit.
A similar experiment was carried out in October 2003. But the operation then was to mend a 0.5-millimetre-wide artery in a rat's tail.
The next phase of the program is to carry out a remote-controlled operation using a robot controlled from the ground by satellite.
This experiment should take place within a year, Martin says. 
Anaesthetist Dr Laurent de Coninck says that zero-gravity surgery offers huge promise for space exploration, although it would at first be limited to treating simple injuries.
"Today more than 400 people have already travelled into space. The chances of injuries occurring during missions will become ever greater and to bring a wounded person back to Earth for treatment is both risky for them and expensive," he says. 
World space agencies hope that by 2020 a permanently inhabited base can be established on the Moon, to conduct research and exploit lunar resources.
Researchers would learn to live off the lunar land and test technologies for voyages to Mars. 
In the shorter term, pre-built robotic surgical blocks could also have valuable uses here on Earth, for instance inside caves or locations that are difficult to access, such as after an earthquake. 
"Long-distance flights to Mars will not be happening in the immediate future," says Guy Laslandes, head of the Ariane V program at France's National Centre for Space Studies.
"But the experiment will allow the development of working methods and miniaturised tools that can be used in extreme conditions on Earth, such as during missions to the North Pole."

This Costa Rican zebra tarantula has an archaic way of sticking to surfaces
Tarantulas secrete sticky silk from their feet to help them adhere to shiny surfaces, says an international team of scientists. 
Spiders are already known to have two mechanisms that allow them to walk upside or cling to smooth vertical surfaces.
One is the use of thousands of tiny hairs that generate a weak electrical bond, using van der Waals forces, with the surface. Another is tiny claws that lock onto rough surfaces.
But scientists at the Max Planck Institute for Metals Research in Stuttgart and US colleagues have now found, in tarantulas at least, there is a third gripping tool.
Tarantulas have microscopic nozzle-like structures on their feet that secrete a viscous silk-like filament.
The researchers report their results today in the journal Nature.
The team carried out its research with zebra tarantulas (Aphonopelma seemanni) from Costa Rica, which were induced to walk around a slick, vertical glass surface.
To walk up, the spiders used their distal claws to keep a grip. 
To walk down, they exuded fibres between 0.2 and 1.0 micrometres in diameter from all four pairs of feet that adhered to the glass and stopped them sliding and falling.
The German team, led by Dr Stanislav Gorb at the institute's evolutionary biomaterials group, says the new discovery raises questions about spiders' evolutionary past. 
Arachnids also have an abdominal pouch, a spinneret, which produces the silk to make webs. 
Gorb theorises that spiders may have started making silk with their feet before they began to do so with their spinnerets, as this would have helped their survival by avoiding catastrophic falls. 
The next step is to carry out a genetic analysis of the foot silk proteins to compare it to the spinneret silk proteins.
Industrial chemists study spider silk as they are eager to make a synthetic copy that mimics its strength and resilience.

Since ancient times, people have dyed their grey hair black
A 2000-year-old recipe for hair dye shows Ancient Greeks and Romans used nanotechnology to permanently colour grey hair black, say experts.
Dr Philippe Walter of the French state museum agency's Centre for Research and Restoration and colleagues report their findings online in the journal Nano Letters.
The researchers made up a batch of dye according to a recipe used since Greco-Roman times, which includes a mixture of lead oxide and slaked lime.
They soaked 50 milligrams of blond human hair in the dye for three days, then studied the hair closely.
The hair turned progressively black and when the researchers took cross-sections of hair and studied it under the microscope they found nanocrystals of lead sulfide inside the hair shaft.
The lead in the lead oxide had reacted with sulfur from the amino acids found in hair keratins, the scientists say, giving the black colour.
They say the 5 nanometre lead sulfide crystals look very much like lead sulfide quantum dots that are made today by advanced materials science methods.
The researchers say their discovery might help develop new mineral-based nanomaterials.
Dr Ivan Kempson, a materials scientist and research fellow at the University of South Australia, is impressed with the research.
"It's the highest resolution and most detailed study of the incorporation of a metal like lead into hair," he says.
Kempson says the findings are interesting for his own work, which looks at how hair takes up metals from the environment.
But he says it is not yet clear how the sulfur in the keratin is made available to interact with the lead in the hair.
Kempson says the research is also of interest to the cosmetics industry in developing hair dyes.
"If you know how they penetrate the hair and how they react within the hair then you can develop better cosmetic products," he says.
The research team includes a member from L'Or&eacute;al cosmetics company.

One day you might be greeted by a talking, thinking computer-animated face like this one when booking a ticket, or withdrawing money from the bank
Talking, thinking cartoon faces that understand our needs may one day improve our chances of getting what we want from computers, say experts.
The animated faces may replace the mouse, keyboard and the touch screen as the main way we interact with computers, say when booking tickets or withdrawing money from the bank.
Professor Denis Burnham, director of the MARCS Auditory Laboratories at the University of Western Sydney, says a talking, thinking head could be available in the next 10 years.
"At the moment we use keyboards and mouses [to communicate]," says Burnham, a behavioural psychologist.
"[But] what people really want with computers is that they actually understand what you're doing and know what you want and can interact with you a lot more effectively and naturally."
Burnham is heading up a new A$3.4 million (US$2.5 million) project, funded by the Australian Research Council and the National Health and Medical Research Council, to develop a computer-generated head that emulates face-to-face conversation.
Burnham's team will use technologies such as computer animation, speech recognition and computer-generated dialogue to construct the talking, thinking head.
And the researchers will use cognitive science to evaluate and improve how well it communicates.
Frustrated?
From the word processor's irritating 'paper clip man' to frustrating telephone automated directory services, success so far in this arena has been somewhat limited.
Burnham hopes his team's talking, thinking head will make our conversations with artifically intelligent machines more effective for two reasons.
First, it will include visual cues, such as different mouth shapes and face expressions that help us understand what is being said. 
Second, the head will be capable of tailoring its communication to different types of people, by accessing different databases. 
It would select articulation, intonation, facial expression or vocabulary to best suit the person it's talking to, says Burnham.
He says such a head on a videophone could make automated directory assistance more effective at communicating with children, or people with accents or hearing disabilities.
It might also remember different individuals and personalise its interactions with them, and have appropriate emotional responses when the need arises, Burnham says.
The head might even "switch to sympathetic mode" when we get irate with it for not understanding us correctly.
Learning all the time
Burnham says he plans to develop a head that is also able to learn from its interactions with different people and improve its communication.
He says current prototype heads are used in tourist information kiosks, for ticketing and language instruction.
One project is also exploring the use of a talking, thinking head as a personal companion and minder for elderly or disabled people.
Burnham says the project will initially explore two scenarios where the head might be useful: dealing with billing complaints and language tuition.

Dust mites and their faeces contain an enzyme that destroys the protective function of the skin, leaving it open to other irritants
Dust mites, which infest the cleanest homes and thrive in bedding and carpets, disrupt the protective function of the skin, a study has found.
This leaves it vulnerable to other allergens and irritants in the environment.
House dust mites and their droppings have long been linked to asthma and eczema attacks, and researchers in Japan say they think they know why.
In a paper to be published in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology, the researchers found that mites and their faeces contain an enzyme, which destroys the protective function of the skin, leaving it vulnerable to other irritants.
"People go to hospital only after they develop severe [skin] disease, but little is known as to what happened or what caused it," says Assistant Professor Toshiro Takai of the Atopy Research Centre at the Juntendo University School of Medicine in Tokyo.
"Our study suggests that it may be due to the disruption of the barrier function of the skin [by the dust mite]." 
In their experiment, the scientists dabbed hairless mice with a solution containing the mite enzyme and observed that the rodents soon suffered water loss from their skins. 
They then dabbed the mice with riboflavin, or vitamin B2, which is accepted in the scientific community as a substitute for allergens and irritants in the environment.
"We observed in the mice transepidermal water loss, which is an indication of disruption of the skin barrier. We also observed the penetration of riboflavin into the skin," Takai says. 
Takai says the finding provides an explanation for skin-related allergies in humans and he hopes dermatologists would investigate more closely into the role of the dust mite.
"In a healthy person, the barrier is complete and irritants can't get into the skin. But partial disruption of the barrier facilitates passage of allergens and other irritants," he says. 
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), asthma affected 300 million people worldwide in 2005, killing 255,000 of them.
The death figure is expected to increase by 20% in 10 years' time if urgent action if not taken, the WHO says.

Say cheese
Research that calculates the number of photos you need to take to make sure no one in the group has their eyes closed has won two Australians an Ig Nobel award.
Nic Svenson and Dr Piers Barnes of CSIRO Industrial Physics have been awarded the  Ig Nobel Prize for mathematics at a ceremony at Harvard University.
"I end up doing a lot of group photographs and the number of people blinking in photographs is driving me nuts," says Svenson, a CSIRO communications officer.
So she thought there had to be some kind of rule to figure out how many photographs to take to make sure she got a good one.
Svenson researched basic information on how long a blink lasts, how many times people blink per minute and how fast camera shutters go.
Barnes, a physicist, worked out that blinks are random and that one person's blinks don't influence another person's blinks. And unless you have got something stuck in your eye, your blinks don't influence each other either.
"He came up with a graph showing the probability of having someone blink in a photograph," says Svenson. 
"Then he was able to do the reverse of that equation, as it were, to come up with the number of photographs to take."
The two found out that when you're taking photos of a group with fewer than 20 people you divide the number of people by three to get the number of shots you need to take.
But in bad light the camera shutter is open for longer and this gives people more of a chance to blink while a photo is taken. So in bad light you need to divide the number of people by two to get the number of shots.
As the size of the group increases, the number of shots you need to take increases exponentially, says Svenson.
And by the time there are around 50 people in the group, she says you can "kiss your hopes of an unspoilt photo goodbye".
Fingernails scraping on a blackboard
The winner for the Ig Nobel prize for acoustics went to three scientists who investigated responses to the sound of fingernails scraping on a blackboard. 
The study, called 'Psychoacoustics of a chilling sound', found that scraping fingernails was the most annoying sound out of 16 sounds tested.
It was much more annoying, for example, than the sound of a dragged stool, a metal drawer being opened, scraping wood, scraping metal or rubbing together two pieces of polystyrene foam.
The research, which was published in the journal Perception and Psychoacoustics in the 1980s, concludes that "acoustic energy in the middle range of frequencies audible to humans" is the culprit.
But it could not answer why such sounds were so grating to the ear.
Teen repellents and headache-free woodpeckers
Still on acoustics, the Ig Nobel peace prize went to the developers of a device that makes an annoying noise that teenagers can hear but not adults. 
The device, which emits a super-high-pitched mosquito-like buzz, was originally used as an electromechanical teenager repellent and later used for telephone ringtones that teenagers could hear but not their teachers.
Still on mosquitoes, the Ig Nobel prize for biology went to researchers who reported in The Lancet that the female malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, is attracted to the smell of Limburger cheese just as much as to the smell of human feet.
The Ig Nobel prize for medicine went to the authors of case reports in medical journals on the 'Termination of intractable hiccups with digital rectal massage'.
The winner of the Ig Nobel prize for ornithology was a professor of ophthalmology who helped explain why woodpeckers don't get headaches.
The Ig Nobel prizes honour achievements that first make people laugh and then make them think.
They are produced by the science humour magazine, The Annals of Improbable Research.

Mature cells retain the genetic capacity to grow into all cell types needed to regenerate an entire organism, scientists say
Scientists say they have cloned mice from white blood cells with a similar technique used to create Dolly the sheep.
The US researchers, who publish their results online in the journal Nature Genetics, say their method shows it is possible to clone animals from mature cells.
They say their findings counter the argument that truly mature tissue is too old to be regenerated.
Dr Jerry Yang of the University of Connecticut, Dr Tao Cheng of the University of Pittsburgh, and colleagues cloned mice using fully differentiated, or mature, white blood cells called granulocytes. 
They used somatic cell nuclear transfer, in which the nucleus from a cell of the animal to be cloned is injected into an egg whose nucleus has been removed.
This process works very poorly in mice and usually a two-step procedure is needed: first growing tiny embryos, then removing their embryonic stem cells to generate mouse pups. 
Yang's team tried cloning using the blood cells at various levels of development, from the stem cells stage through to full maturity, called full differentiation.
"What was surprising, the efficiency went up as we got more differentiated cells," Yang says.
"That was very, very surprising, very shocking to us." 
Only the fully mature granulocytes were able to produce two live cloned pups, although both died within a few hours of birth, the researchers report. 
"Even we were surprised to find fully differentiated cells were more efficient for cloning, because granulocytes are not capable of dividing," Cheng says. 
"In fact, we repeated our experiments six times just to be sure. Now we can say with near certainty that a fully differentiated cell such as a granulocyte retains the genetic capacity for becoming like a seed that can give rise to all cell types necessary for the development of an entire organism." 
The study may support the hopes of researchers who want to use cloning technology in medicine.
Supporters of so-called therapeutic cloning want to some day be able to take a single cell from a patient, perhaps a skin cell, and use it to generate tailor-made tissue or organ transplants. 
To do so, fully mature cells must maintain the ability to regress and be reprogrammed.

The way we relate to family members is culturally determined. But is this also reflected in brain activity?
The culture you are born into influences the way your brain works, an Australian conference has heard.
Juan Dominguez, a PhD student at the University of Melbourne, discussed the effects of 'enculturation' on the human brain at a recent anthropology conference in Cairns.
The researcher believes different cultures produce different brains and that cultural differences reflect different neurological functioning.
"In certain societies and cultures there are certain patterns of behaviour, people may make certain evaluations, have certain opinions, there are certain tasks that are culturally specific," he says.
"We should be able to find that ... the brain would have some sort of bias acquired through exposure to culture."
Dominguez is piloting a brain scanning study in which he will test how people from different cultures react when they are shown photos of family members.
He believes the differing kinship relations will be reflected in different types of brain activity.
Dr Douglas Lewis, a senior lecturer at anthropology who is supervising the work, acknowledges this is a controversial area.
But Lewis says there is no suggestion that one culture is "smarter" or "better" than another.
Rather, the emerging science of neuroanthropology suggests that brains within a group can be 'wired' by common experience, just as individual brains become 'wired' by individual experiences.
"What we're looking for are correlates in the brain that anthropologists have in the past thought of as being cultural or culturally mediated," he says.
Recognising faces
The study will test brain function in an Indian Tamil and an Australian of Anglo-Saxon descent.
He says while western cultures call both maternal and paternal uncles 'uncle', other cultures, including Tamil, call paternal uncles 'father' and reserve 'uncle' for maternal uncles.
