All but one of the birds with the severed trigeminal nerve were home the next day, suggesting that the ability to detect magnetic fields is not used to navigate. Among the control group, only one pigeon was lost.
Meanwhile, most of the birds deprived of their sense of smell were totally lost. Only four made it home.
A patchwork of smells
According to Gagliardo, homing pigeons create odour maps of the areas they fly over and use them to navigate, basically reading landscapes as a patchwork of odours.
"In my view this study certainly ends the debate for homing pigeons," says Professor Verner Bingman, a behavioural neuroscientist at Bowling Green State University, Ohio.
"It is now as clear as can be that information about the spatial variation in atmospheric odours detected by the olfactory nerve is the primary sensory basis of the homing pigeon navigational map."
But Associate Professor Martin Wild, a neurobiologist at the University of Auckland who performed the surgical procedures for both the Mora and Gagliardo studies, cautions that the Pisa experiment should not be considered the definitive study on how pigeons navigate.
"Nature does not yield up her secrets so easily," says Wild. "The birds will use whatever sensory cues are available at the time. Showing that pigeons actually use a magnetic sense is extraordinarily difficult."
Wild further points out that homing pigeons are thought to have two magnetic senses, not just one. One is in the beak and the other in the photoreceptors of the eye.
"Perhaps both are used under different circumstances," he says.

Could the hobbit really be one of us after all?
A new paper has inflamed the debate over the hobbit's origins, with one researcher criticising the scientific journal that published the research.
A paper in today's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science (PNAS) is the second this year to conclude that the hobbit is just a sick human.
Indonesian researcher Professor Teuku Jacob, from Gadjah Mada University, and an international team argue that the hobbit is a microcephalic pygmy rather than a new species of hominid.
"All the odd things about it aren't things which indicate another species," says co-author and anatomist Dr Alan Thorne, a visiting fellow at the Australian National University.
"It happens to be an individual [human] with major, probably genetic, deformities."
Thorne says the team reached its conclusions by comparing 140 anatomical features of the hobbit specimens with those of human specimens.
He says none of these features were outside the normal range for humans, in particular Australomelanesians, which is his research speciality.
Thorne says previous comparisons of the hobbit had been with inappropriate western European populations.
Study and journal criticised
But two of the original Australian discoverers of the hobbit, Professor Peter Brown and Professor Mike Morwood from the University of New England, have lashed out at the researchers, rejecting arguments put forward in the latest paper.
Brown also criticises the journal itself for publishing the research.
Brown says the paper's conclusions are "unsupported by any published evidence" and that the paper makes "misleading comments" about previously published papers.
Australian National University taxonomist Professor Colin Groves, who was not involved in the research, also rejects the PNAS paper.
"Most of their claims of pathology are not substantial," says Groves, who has a paper due out in the Journal of Human Evolution rejecting the microcephaly theory. 
Unethical conduct?
Brown says putting aside the scientific argument itself, PNAS should not have published the research because of what he says is the research team's "unethical scientific practice", a claim the authors reject.
One of the sticking points is whether correct permission was obtained to study the precious hobbit bones.
The PNAS article states that the researchers were permitted to study the hobbit materials in accordance with a research agreement between the Indonesian National Research Centre of Archaeology and the University of New England.
But Brown and Morwood say the researchers breached the agreement by removing the material from the archaeology centre in Jakarta before the Australian researchers had managed to complete their analysis.
It was removed without the agreement of both parties and without any conditions for proper credit, says Morwood.
Brown is also critical that Thorne had a flight to Indonesia paid for by an Australian TV company to examine the material.
But Thorne says there's nothing improper about this.
"The fact that my fares were paid by a television company is simply a function of the fact that I'm now retired and someone wants to pay my airfares I'm not going to knock it back," he says.
Brown also says the material was damaged beyond repair while being studied.
Thorne says he didn't see the material after it was returned from Jacob's lab but when he saw it, it was in fine condition.
Scientists behaving badly or a misunderstanding?
Overall, Brown thinks the conduct of the PNAS authors amounts to bad behaviour.
"I can't think of a more extreme example of unethical scientific practice," says Brown, "For PNAS to reward their behaviour casts aspersions on the journal."
Thorne says he doesn't understand the claim. He says he was invited to look at the material by Jacob, whom Thorne had met many times over his decades of research in Indonesia. 
"There was nothing unethical about that at all," he says, adding that the PNAS paper had five referees, including experts in anatomy, pathology, growth and development.
Journal stands by its paper
A spokesperson for the journal confirms the article was peer-reviewed prior to submission and also by a member of the PNAS editorial board before being accepted for publication. 
PNAS declined to comment on Brown's allegations, instead referring ABC Science Online's questions to the study authors.

The star AE Aurigae surrounded by dust, which may be hiding deuterium and complicating astronomers' efforts to study star and galaxy formation
A six-year study of a primordial element created just after the birth of the universe may force scientists to revise theories about how stars and galaxies formed.
Using a telescope sensitive to far ultraviolet light, astronomers have discovered that there is much more deuterium, a heavy form of hydrogen created minutes after the Big Bang, than expected.
"Our models of the chemical evolution of the Milky Way will have to be revised significantly," says astrophysicist Professor Jeffrey Linsky with the University of Colorado at Boulder.
All the deuterium that ever existed was believed to have been forged within a few minutes of the Big Bang 13.7 billion years ago. 
Deuterium is a heavy version of regular hydrogen, the lightest and most abundant element. But its nucleus harbours a neutron in addition to the normal proton, so it is twice hydrogen's mass.
Because stars consume deuterium and there is no known process to create more, the isotope serves as a tracer for star formation and galaxy creation throughout time.
Scientists thought they knew how much deuterium there was, figuring about one-third of the original deuterium was remaining.
Not so, according to scientists using data from the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer, or FUSE.
Launched in 1999, the FUSE telescope breaks light into component wavelengths so scientists can determine which chemicals and other phenomena the beams might have passed through before striking the observatory's instruments.
The team provides the first hard evidence that deuterium can attach to interstellar dust grains, as well as exist as a free-floating gas.
The finding explains why deuterium is not spread evenly throughout the galaxy, but instead appears in clumps.
Solving one puzzle, however, laid the groundwork for a far thornier question. In adding up the amount of deuterium, whether free-flying or bound to dust, there was far more than expected.
"Since the 1970s, we have been unable to explain why deuterium levels vary all over the place," Linsky says. "The answer we found is as unsettling as it is exciting."
FUSE found that the present-day deuterium abundance is less than 15% below the primordial values, rather than about 33%.
"This implies that either significantly less material has been converted to helium and heavier elements in stars or that much more primordial gas has rained down onto the galaxy over its lifetime than had been thought," says Linsky.
Associate Professor Brian Fields, with the University of Illinois in Urbana says:
"FUSE has solved the mystery about why the deuterium is where it is. Now scientists need to try to explain why there is so much of it."

A relative of this ancient marine organism used to dig through the mud, forming a network of tunnels
Trilobites, the extinct marine creatures famous to fossil-hunters everywhere, may have once done digging of their own, say UK and Swedish researchers.
Rocks found in a Swedish limestone quarry contain the remains of trilobites inside networks of tunnels, which appear to have been subsurface thoroughfares for the little bug-like organisms.
"It's very rare to find a trilobite in a burrow," says Amherst College's Associate Professor Whitey Hagadorn, an expert on tracks, burrows and other 'trace' fossils that can give important clues to a long-lost species' behaviour and environment.
There's only one other such fossil known, he says, and even that one doesn't show evidence that the tunnels were much more than single-use, one-way streets that collapsed after the animals made their way through the muck.
"The fact that they form open networks, that is new and different," says Hagadorn.
Such sand-filled tunnels are common in the fossil record, he says, and have generally been attributed to soft-bodied animals that left behind no hard parts.
But in recent years, palaeontologists have begun to suspect that trilobites may have also done some digging.
Finding trilobites inside tunnel remains in Sweden's 465-million-year-old Holen limestone is, therefore, a fitting but unexpected hint about how the ubiquitous creatures fit into the Palaeozoic ocean ecosystem.
Dr Lesley Cherns of Cardiff University says these particular fossils were found by accident.
"We sat down to lunch and I noticed that there were trilobites in these burrows," says Cherns, who co-authored a paper in this month's issue of the journal Geology.
A life underground
The trilobites were probably killed by something like a sudden upwelling of oxygen-poor water or some other quick and deadly event, Cherns explains.
The tunnels were then soon buried by a thick layer of mud that sealed them off from scavengers and helped to preserve the evidence.
No-one is quite sure what the trilobites were doing underground.
They could have been hiding from the nautilus-like predators that cruised the Palaeozoic oceans, says Cherns.
Or they may have used the water flowing through the tunnels to help oxygenate their gills, like some modern lobsters do, she says.
Hagadorn has other explanations. "They could have been going down to eat, reproduce, hide ... who knows?
"Hopefully this will motivate people to go out and look for more of these."
That could eventually answer some of those questions, he says.

Can terrorist tendencies become hardwired into the brain?
Neuroscience can be a weapon against terrorism, says a leading brain scientist who is investigating the neurology of belief.
Professor Susan Greenfield, director of the Royal Institution of Great Britain, says there is no such thing as a brain centre for terrorism.
But she says that understanding the neurology of belief, identity and risk can inform the way countries respond to terrorist threats.
"As yet no one has started looking at the neuroscience of terrorism [but] neuroscience is really in the foothills of this very important question," she says.
Greenfield says the brain becomes individualised by the way connections between brain cells form, mainly in the first 18 years of life.
Experiences during this time leave a mark on the brain, essentially hardwiring the way we perceive and respond to our world.
Embedding belief
Greenfield and colleagues at the Oxford Centre for Science of the Mind, which she directs, are investigating how belief is laid down in the brain.
This goes to the heart of terrorism, she says, which is basically a set of tactics founded on a belief system.
She says belief becomes embedded in the brain either through one single, significant event or through constant repetition, such as prayer or rituals, rather than evidence-based deduction.
Once adopted, belief is very difficult to shake, although the use of cognitive therapy to treat depression shows that it is possible to 'rewire' the brain, Greenfield says.
"Yes you can rearrange people's connections even in maturity so that they see the world in a different way," she says.
Risky business
Understanding risk is also a key factor in understanding what goes on in the mind of a terrorist, she says.
Greenfield suggests the high integration of technology in our lives is producing a generation more reckless than previous ones.
She says the instant gratification of technology prioritises experience above the consequences of our experiences, producing an "experientially biased" society.
"If you going to have the techno world driving moment-to-moment experiences over learning and thought, then it would follow that the next generation will be more reckless and prone to risk," she says.
Associate Professor Robert Heath, a psychologist and risk management consultant at the University of South Australia, says terrorists are both born and made.
He says terrorists have a psychological predisposition to violence and typically score highly on psychotism, neuroticism and sociopathology.
But they also need a 'trigger point'.
"You need to have the disposition but you also need to have a belief set getting implanted in your head ... you also need to have a referent group that's a very strong influence," he says.
How do we respond to terrorism?
Greenfield says studying the brain can also shed light on how the general population responds to perceived threats.
"What does it do to us as a society?" she says.
She says studies in lab rats show that the best way to induce neurosis is to engender a sense of perpetual threat without a way of avoiding it.
"One of the hardest things for a human is to be told that you're in danger and not be allowed a way out or seen any means by which you can take evasive action," she says.
"So is it actually productive for governments to tell people 'you're in a high state of security' if you're not allowing a compensatory action."

The turtles are an important source of protein for Aboriginal people and children are taught to hunt them from an early age
Feral pigs are threatening the northern snake-necked turtle population in Arnhem Land to the point where the species could become extinct in some areas, Australian researchers predict.
In a single experiment, feral pigs killed 96% of radio-tracked turtles in a monitored area within a three-month period.
"They dig them up like truffles," says PhD candidate Damien Fordham, of the University of Canberra, whose research will be published in the journal Biological Conservation.
Fordham says while the turtles are found across northern Australia, the consequences of extinction for the local Indigenous population would be "extreme".
Northern snake-necked turtles have traditionally provided an important seasonal source of protein for Indigenous communities in Arnhem Land.
Not only would Indigenous communities lose a valuable source of bush tucker, but with it the strong cultural ties they have with the turtle.
Fordham and colleagues mounted tiny radio tracking devices to the shells of 40 snake-necked turtles around waterholes in Indigenous land around Maningrida, 450 kilometres east of Darwin.
Turtles aestivate, or dig themselves into the mud, to escape heat and lack of water during the late dry season, anywhere between August to December.
Of the 28 recorded turtle deaths during the 12-week period, 27 were attributed to feral pigs.
Researchers believe feral pigs could have stumbled upon, and then eaten, some of the turtles while they were rooting around billabongs in search of morsels such as water chestnut.
But it was clear that in 11 of 27 turtle deaths the pigs had specifically located and dug them up.
Generally, pigs make a huge mess at they root around looking for food, but researchers noted relatively undisturbed areas around the 11 turtle deaths, indicating a direct 'hit'.
"This is disturbing as it indicates that pigs actively seek out and prey on aestivating turtles," Fordham says.
The researchers predict more turtles will die as the feral pig population increases.
Mathematical modelling of how many turtles survive in the year of the study, if carried across all years, could led to distinction of the turtles in the region, the researchers note.
Researchers say the turtle's best hope for survival is a few years of good rainfall, when pig predation rates are low.
Fordham would also like to see government funding to 'fence in' turtle-rich areas.

The Bullet Cluster, shown here, was formed after two large clusters of galaxies collided, the most energetic event since the Big Bang
Astronomers have announced the first direct evidence of dark matter, although they still have only an inkling of what the elusive stuff is made of.
The unprecedented observations come from careful weighing of gas and stars flung about in the most violent and massive collision in the known universe.
It's a tiff between two clusters of galaxies in what's collectively called the Bullet Cluster, which has caused stars and dark matter from different galaxies to tear past each other while the more widely distributed interstellar gases collide and slow.
"All the matter in a typical galaxy occupies the same space," says astrophysicist Dr Maxim Markevitch of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.
"In this case the gas and galaxies are separated in space. Galaxies flew through each other but their gas clouds didn't so easily."
Visualise, for instance, a cosmic million-kilometre per hour collision between two vast dollops of porridge with raisins in it. 
The raisins would represent the stars and dark matter, and the oats the gases.
The raisins would shoot through with few direct raisin-on-raisin hits, while the oats would get stuck in a patch in the middle.
The result is different patches of space: one with lots of hot colliding gas and two others on either side with all the dark matter and stars in visible galaxies.
The astrophysicists know the visible stars still have the dark matter with them because they weighed the mass in the starry patches by measuring how those patches bend the light from far more distant objects. The more a starry region bends light, the more massive it is.
In this case, the starry areas in the colliding clusters have far more mass than can be accounted for by visible stars or by interstellar gases, since the stars left the gases behind. The only thing left to explain it is dark matter.
"This proves in a direct and simple way that dark matter exists," says Markevitch.
Suite of telescopes
The discovery was made using a suite of observations from the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope and Chandra X-ray Observatory, along with the ground-based European Southern Observatory Very Large Telescope and the Magellan Telescope.
A paper on the discovery will be published in the Astrophysical Journal Letters, a journal of the American Astronomical Society.
Until now the existence of dark matter was inferred by the fact that galaxies have only one-fifth of the visible matter needed to create the gravity that keeps them intact.
So the rest must be invisible to telescopes, or 'dark'.
The observations of the Bullet Cluster, officially known as galaxy cluster 1E0657-56, do not explain what dark matter is. 
But they do provide one solid little hint, says Dr Douglas Clowe, a researcher at the University of Arizona in Tucson.
"We can place some constraints on dark matter particles," he says.
Clues to what dark matter's made from
It appears that dark matter particles, whatever they are, behave more like the raisins than the oats; they are either widely spaced, like stars, or have some other way of avoiding collisions with each other.
It's a small clue, says Clowe, but seeing it play out in the Bullet Cluster makes it an unusually solid clue for what's so far proven to be the most mysterious stuff in the universe.
"The great news about this is that it shows once and for all that dark matter exists," says physicist Assistant Professor Sean Carroll of the University of Chicago.
And that means, he says, there's less need to tweak Einstein's laws of gravitation to explain what's seen in galaxies.

Chocolate, citrus or stinky? Researchers are identifying the fungi that give regional varieties of coffee their distinctive taste
Fungi are the secret to tasty coffee, says a Brazilian researcher who is the first to identify the moulds that give coffee its distinctive range of flavours and aromas.
Dr Martha Taniwaki of Brazil's Institute of Food Technology presented her research at the International Mycological Conference in Cairns this week.
Taniwaki says while the characteristics of the bean partly determine taste and aroma, naturally occurring fungi also put the zing in your favourite brew.
"We are doing a project to correlate the presence of certain species of fungi in coffee with coffee flavour," she says.
The research team collected raw coffee beans from farms in Sao Paulo and Minas Gerais in Brazil, disinfected them, incubated them for seven days, and isolated the fungi.
Then the team got down to the pleasant part of the experiment. They roasted, ground, brewed and drank the raw samples, rating them for body, aroma, acidity, bitterness, astringency and sweetness.
Some of the flavours associated with moulds included floral, citric, caramel, chocolate and toast.
The fungi occur naturally inside the coffee been and are associated with regional characteristics caused by soil, climate and humidity.
While the pleasant taste-producing fungi are not harmful to health, others can be toxic, and these often produce rancid, stinky, smoky, woody or fermented bouquets.
Tanawaki says her research is currently focused on isolating the various fungi and how they are metabolised.
But it may be possible to use the knowledge to produce ranges of coffee with a particular flavour, potentially complementing the traditional bottles of vanilla or hazelnut flavourings found at your local cafe.
"We can encourage the good fungi to grow and use it to produce good flavours, like wine or other food like cheese where you use mould or yeast to ... give a special flavour," she says.
Professor Paul Gadek, an Australian plant molecular biologist and head of tropical plant sciences at James Cook University, says Taniwaki's research has implications for Australia, where coffee is a growth industry.
He says it would be interesting to find out which species of fungi are found in Australian coffee beans.
"What are the characteristics that we can grow regionally to generate distinctive flavours?"

Researchers can now test the effects of airborne toxins on human lung cells grown in the lab
Researchers are using 'mini-lungs' made from cells grown in the lab to test the effects of airborne toxins after workplace contamination and chemical spills.
The work has won Dr Amanda Hayes, Shahnaz Bakand and Chris Winder of the University of New South Wales (UNSW) a Eureka Prize for research that replaces the use of animals or animal products.
Hayes says the use of human epithelial lung cells reduces the need for what are often inhumane tests on animals.
Traditionally, the toxicity of gases and vapours are tested on lab animals that are put into a chamber and subjected to lethal doses.
But Hayes says the need for such tests can be reduced by using human epithelial cells grown on a porous membrane.
She says the method is well suited to field work because all investigators need to do is place the cell-containing membrane in a small diffusion chamber and pump in air.
The 'mini-lungs' can be subjected to a range of tests including energy metabolism and viability, to see how they are responding to the toxin.
Any cell death resulting from the exposure would immediately set alarm bells ringing.
Hayes says her group, the only in Australia to use lung cells in this way, has been able to test the effects of chemicals like ammonia and formaldehyde and volatile organic compounds found in paints, solvents and pesticides.
"The research may open new possibilities for toxicity testing of industrial chemicals, environmental contaminants, respiratory drugs, workplace airborne contaminants and fire combustion products," she says.
Hayes says the cells tend to be more sensitive to toxins than a functioning lung but the in vitro effects of the toxins on the cells tally well with effects observed in animals.
The same method can be used to test airborne toxicology on skin and liver cells, she says.
Other recipients of Eureka Prizes include:
*&#9;Professor Rick Shine, University of Sydney, for research into Australian reptiles including snakes cross-dressing and lizard nuclear families.
*&#9;Dr Graeme Batley, Dr Stuart Simpson and Dr Jenny Stauber, CSIRO Energy Technology, for developing standards to measure contamination in sediments and waterways including Sydney Harbour.
*&#9;Dr Ping Koy Lam, Dr Thomas Symul and Andrew Lance, Australian National University, and Christian Weedbrook, University of Queensland, for the use of quantum encryption to protect online privacy.
*&#9;Dr Mike Manefield, UNSW, for innovation and leadership in environmental science, specifically for research into how bacteria can help clean up contaminated soil at industrial sites.
*&#9;Dr Michael Dawson, Professor Matthew England, Alex Sen Gupta, UNSW, for environmental research into modelling ocean circulation.
*&#9;Dr Michael Valenzuela, UNSW, for bioinformatics research into how mental activity keeps dementia at bay.

Adelaide-born Terence Tao was a full professor at the age of 24
Australian prodigy Professor Terence Tao has won the mathematics world's version of a Nobel Prize, the Fields Medal, for contributions to harmonic analysis and numerical theory.
Tao, aged just 31, wins the medal with Russian recluse Dr Grigory Perelman, Frenchman Professor Wendelin Werner and Russian Professor Andrei Okunkov. 
The medal is another claim to fame for the Adelaide-born academic who earned his PhD from Princeton University at 21 and was full professor of mathematics at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) at 24.
Asked why he devotes himself to pushing the boundaries of the discipline, Tao says: "Because it's fun." 
"What interests me is the connection between maths and the real world," he said, following an awards ceremony at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Madrid. 
Eemeritus Professor Alf van der Poorten, of the Centre for Number Theory Research at Macquarie University in Sydney, salutes Tao's achievement.
"It's a wonderful thing for Australian mathematics. He was a young genius and [Australia] had people in place to look after him. He comes back quite regularly," says van der Poorten. 
Professor John Garnett, former UCLA college chair of mathematics, recently placed Tao on a level with Mozart, "except without Mozart's personality problems".
"Mathematics just flows out of him," Garnett says. 
Tao was awarded the Fields Medal for his work on a branch of maths that uses equations from physics in the theoretical field of harmonic analysis, a discipline that focuses on acoustic wave frequencies. 
He also specialises in disciplines including algebraic geometry and number theory.
Another branch of Tao's research has been prime numbers, based on theories first put forward more than two thousand years ago by the Greek mathematician Euclid.
Russian recluse
Meanwhile Perelman, the Russian mathematician who won the medal with Tao, declined to attend the ceremony, choosing instead to stay at home and watch television.
He declined to comment on the award and on the reasons why he is shunning publicity.
Perelman resigned from the Steklov Mathematics Institute suddenly in January without explanation.
Former colleagues say they have not seen him since.
In 1996, Perelman won an award at the Second European Congress of Mathematics in Budapest. Russian newspapers say that he turned down the prize because he considered the jury insufficiently qualified. 
But Perelman's international fame in the mathematics world came in 2002 and 2003 when he published two papers online that appeared to solve the Poincar&eacute; Conjecture. 
The riddle had perplexed mathematicians since it was posited by Frenchman Henri Poincare in 1904. In just 61 pages of sketchily written notes, Perelman seemed to prove it but he never published a full proof in academic journals. 
The conjecture was one of the so-called Millenium Prize Problems for which the Clay Mathematics Institute in Boston announced a one-million-dollar prize. Perelman never picked up the prize money.

There may be remnants of Neanderthal genes in the nuclear DNA of people with European ancestors
People of European descent may be 5% Neanderthal, according to a DNA study that questions whether modern humans left Africa and replaced all other existing hominids.
The same study, published in the latest issue of the journal PloS Genetics, also says West Africans could be related to an archaic human population.
As both groups spread, the findings suggest we all have a bit of archaic DNA in our genes.
"Instead of a population that left Africa 100,000 years ago and replaced all other archaic human groups, we propose that this population interacted with another population that had been in Europe for much longer, maybe 400,000 years," says Vincent Plagnol.
Plagnol, a researcher in the Department of Molecular and Computational Biology at the University of Southern California, and colleague Assistant Professor Jeffrey Wall analysed patterns of ancestral linkage in 135 modern individuals.
They looked at people from Utah with ancestors from Northern and Western Europe and Yoruba people from West Africa.
Using statistics and computer modelling, the researchers focused on linkage 'disequilibriums', or sections within genes that did not make sense if only modern human matings are considered.
The missing genetic links only fit if some other hominid population is introduced into the model, the scientists say.
"We considered the data from modern human DNA and fitted a model to explain what we see," explains Plagnol.
"We found that a simple model cannot explain the data if we do not add an 'ancestral population'. If this population did not cross with modern humans, or almost did not, the effect is too small to explain the data. We find that a rate of 5% is what is needed to explain what we see."
The researchers agree with recent studies that conclude Neanderthals did not contribute any mitochondrial DNA, or mtDNA, genetic material that is passed from mothers to children. 
But they say other portions of the European genome, such as those associated with nuclear DNA, may still harbour the Neanderthal imprint.
Plagnol says different parts of the genome have different ancestry, so an individual could have a fraction of a certain chromosome that is inherited from a Neanderthal, but then possess "very typical Homo sapiens mtDNA".
The scientists are not certain which early human group could have contributed to West African DNA, but both Europeans and Africans in the study showed about the same 5% archaic contribution.
Neanderthals are believed to have originated in Africa around 400,000 years ago, but they left and then settled in Europe, hence the apparent lack of interaction with modern humans in Africa.
Alan Templeton, professor of Evolutionary and Population Programs at the University of Michigan, has also conducted DNA studies and comes to similar conclusions.
"The humans who were in Africa and the humans who were in Eurasia were regularly interchanging genes," he says.
"There was interbreeding and when humans came out of Africa 100,000 years ago they did not replace these other human populations in Eurasia."
New technologies are being developed to sequence nuclear DNA from fossils, so in the near future, scientists may learn more about how modern human genes compare with those of archaic humans, like Neanderthals.

The scientists removed a single cell from the embryo using a technique more commonly used in IVF labs
A US biotechnology company says it has developed a way to make human embryonic stem cells without destroying the original embryo.
The development, published online today in the journal Nature, could dispel ethical objections to medical research using such cells.
"It is possible to generate stem cells without destroying the embryo and without destroying its potential for life," says Dr Robert Lanza, chief scientist at Advanced Cell Technology in Massachusetts. 
Stem cells are the body's master cells, available from many sources. But many experts believe the most powerful and versatile cells may be those taken from days-old embryos.
Scientists hope to study these cells, discover which compounds enable them to produce any kind of body tissue, and replicate that to make tailored treatments for diseases such as cancer, diabetes and Parkinson's. 
Lanza's team used a method already used in fertility treatments to remove one cell from a human embryo without harming it. The scientists then grew stem cells from that single cell.
Although the source embryos were not then implanted in a woman, the scientists say they could have been, with the potential to develop normally. 
The team used spare embryos from fertility clinics and let them grow to the 8- to 10-cell stage.
The embryo at that stage is no longer able to divide into twins but the cells can still form any cell or tissue in the body.
Lanza's team managed to get 19 different cells to grow and got two stem-cell batches, or lines. 
"These cell lines were genetically normal and retained their potential to form all of the cells in the human body, including nerve, liver, blood, vascular and retinal cells that could potentially be used to treat a range of human diseases," the researchers write. 
Dr Ronald Green, a Dartmouth College ethics professor who reviewed the experiment for the company, says he is unsure that opponents would accept this research immediately. But he believes they would eventually. 
"I think many of the opponents are going to bridle at this," he says. "People are unprepared for scientific breakthroughs to resolve these ethical issues." 
Dr Kathy Hudson, director of the Genetics and Public Policy Center at Johns Hopkins University, says questions remain over the effect of the procedure on an original embryo and the long-term health of any resulting children. 
Lanza agrees that the method should not be immediately used on people but this is worth studying.
He says his company would make any stem cell lines available to scientists for free.

Gigantic stromatolites in the 2.74 billion-year-old Tumbiana Formation in the Pilbara region of Western Australia. These indicate that oxygen-producing cyanobacteria were already flourishing in the Archaean era
There might have been more oxygen in the atmosphere billions of years ago than anyone thought, says an international team of scientists drilling in outback Australia.
The scientists say that their study of ancient rocks in the Pilbara region of Western Australia may force people to rethink accepted theories of how the prehistoric Earth's atmosphere developed.
They publish their results today in the journal Nature.
Up to now it has been generally accepted that the Earth's atmosphere was devoid of oxygen for some 80% of its existence. 
"The popular model is that there was little oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere before about 2.4 billion years ago," says lead author Professor Hiroshi Ohmoto of Pennsylvania State University.
But Ohmoto's team has cast doubt on the theory after finding sulfur isotopes, indicating prevalent oxygen, that predate the accepted start of atmospheric oxygenation. 
The key lies in the fact that while all isotopes of sulfur behave the same chemically, they have slightly differing masses according to the amount of atmospheric oxygen at the time. 
Isotopes from two sulfur samples the team analysed, one 2.76 billion years old from a lake bed and the other 2.92 billion years old from the sea bed, did not indicate an oxygen-starved atmosphere.
"We analysed the sulfur composition and could not find the abnormal sulfur isotope ratio [indicating no oxygen]," Ohmoto says.
"This is the first time that sediment that old was found to contain no abnormal sulfur isotope ratio."
The team concludes that there are several possible explanations.
Oxygen levels could have fluctuated wildly over the millennia, going from oxygenless before 3 billion years ago to oxygenated between 3 and 2.75 billion years ago, then back to oxygenless from 2.75 to 2.4 billion years ago.
Alternatively, the atmosphere could have contained oxygen as early as 3.8 billion years ago and that sulfur usually associated with no oxygen might have been produced at a time of violent volcanic activity.
Either way, the scientists say, the accepted theories about how the atmosphere evolved needs to be re-evaluated.

It's just not the same any more ...
Dogs feel especially intense jealousy pangs in a 'love triangle' involving their owner and another more recently introduced person or animal, a new study suggests.
The finding suggests dogs may also experience pride, embarrassment, shame and other secondary emotions outside the basic emotions such as anger, anxiety and surprise.
Scientists previously thought only humans and chimpanzees showed behaviours linked to secondary emotions.
A genetic propensity for jealousy may even run as deep as a dog's ancient wolf ancestors, the researchers say.
"I would definitely think you would find jealousy in wolves," says lead researcher Dr Paul Morris.
"For example, sexual jealousy would be an extremely powerful motivator in the wild state. Jealousy would also relate to position in hierarchy and alliances between animals within a pack."
Morris, a University of Portsmouth psychologist and a member of the university's Centre for the Study of Emotion, and colleague Christine Doe studied 1000 domestic animal owners in the south of England.
The researchers asked the pet owners to report observations of both primary and secondary emotions in their animals, which included cats, pigs, horses, rabbits, rats and hamsters, as well as dogs.
All the animals received high scores for secondary emotions, with over 80% of owners saying their dogs showed signs of jealousy.
When Morris and Doe interviewed participants about their observations, owners repeatedly said their pooches seemed jealous when they introduced a new person or animal to the family.
Lost love
Morris also studied the phenomenon directly with his own two dogs, Silver and Jessie. He went out of his way to shower Silver with attention, and then only occasionally gave Jessie her usual pat on the head.
Jessie showed her teeth and snarled, but contained her anger and tried to push her way back into the mini pack.
"Jealousy is at its heart related to the real or anticipated loss of love, affection and attention," says Morris.
"Dog jealousy is different to human jealousy, in that it is tied to the here and now; dog jealousy occurs only in the presence of the interloper. So when I talk about dog jealousy, I see it as a much more primitive and hugely less elaborate version of human jealousy."
A range of emotions
Marc Bekoff, a professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Colorado, is the author of numerous studies and books on animal emotions, most recently two books co-authored with primate researcher Dr Jane Goodall. He agrees with the new findings.
"I believe that Dr Morris is right. Dogs and other animals do exhibit secondary emotions such as jealousy," he says.
"I've studied the emotional lives of animals for more than 25 years and was pleased to see his results."
Morris, who will present his work on canine jealousy at next month's British Association for the Advancement of Science (BA) Festival of Science in Norwich, next plans to study evidence of guilt in dogs and pride in horses.

Male satin bowerbird inspecting the decorations at his bower
Male satin bowerbirds roam the streets and countryside thieving treasures to adorn their bedrooms, Australian researchers find.
But there is no honour among thieves.
While they're out poaching, their own homes are plundered and their finest treasures, blue plastic-lined bottle tops and tail feathers, stolen.
So why do bowerbirds prefer one treasure over another?
This is the question researchers including Janine Wojcieszek, an honours student at the University of Queensland at the time of the research, wanted to find out.
Now she and her colleagues report their findings in the journal Emu: Austral Ornithology.
Male bowerbirds build stick structures that serve as the base for courtship and mating.
They decorate their bowers with colourful objects and are known to steal decorations from each other.
The male satin bowerbird (Ptilonorhynchus violaceus) is particularly drawn to blue objects and researchers hypothesise this could be for reasons of vanity or practicality.
"It's interesting that different [bowerbird] species have preferences for different colours. The species we looked at particularly like blue things, while the spotted bowerbird that is found in western Queensland prefers white, silver and pinks," says Wojcieszek.
"One theory is that the bowerbirds choose the colour that best accentuates their own colour. Because satin bowerbirds are blue, they seek blue to show themselves off." 
Another theory, and one that researchers believe is more likely, is that satin bowerbirds choose blue because that's its 'allotted' colour in the bowerbird world.
The researchers studied a male bowerbird population around the Bunya Mountains, northwest of Brisbane.
Wojcieszek labelled the contents of nearly 40 bowers and then returned each day for three months, a mating season, to see what had been added, and stolen, from the bower.
What she found was a merry-go-round of gathering and stealing.  
"Every day there were changes to the bowers. Either they had stolen something, or something had been stolen from them."
The most popular objects, and those most likely to be stolen, were items that reflected ultraviolet light.
Top of the list were tail feathers from the crimson rosella bird and plastic bottle tops lined with dark blue plastic.
While the tail feathers were stolen more than any other class of decoration, the blue bottle tops were the most popular decoration relative to their availability on bowers.

Archaeological evidence from ancient dung suggests that the people who lived here kept sheep or goats
The discovery of a neolithic complex of caves in Greece suggests not all cavemen were club-wielding, nomadic hunter-gatherers, but included some farmers and shepherds.
They even had the Stone Age equivalent of a toolshed.
Evidence of such homebody cave dwellers comes from a recent excavation of a cave complex dating from 5300-3900 BC.
The abode features plastered floors and evidence of crop-growing and an attached stable nearby. 
"This household was self-contained," says Dr Panagiotis Karkanas, who conducted the excavation of the Kouveleiki caves, located on the cliffs of a shallow valley in the southern Peloponnese.
"I believe that the site was an ordinary household. The people were living there, cooking, sleeping, etc, probably during the whole year. They were both farmers and shepherds," says Karkanas, an archaeologist at the Ephoreia of Palaeoanthropology-Speleology in Athens.
Karkanas came to this conclusion after studying objects uncovered within the caves and after performing a detailed microanalysis of the cave sediments.
Findings will be published in the November issue of the Journal of Archaeological Science.
The complex consists of two caves, the first of which is divided into two chambers by several rock blocks that appear to have fallen from the roof before the caves were inhabited.
The cavemen used this natural divide to their advantage, since one of the fallen rocks was curved and straightened to resemble a wall, which created a corridor between the two chambers.
Burnt manure found in the front chamber suggests a few animals, probably sheep and goats, were housed there. Karkanas says the animals were probably "milkers or very young".
Cereal husks and residue found within the dung indicates the cave dwellers probably farmed the land in front of the caves.
He points out that farming in Greece started at about 6500 BC, at the beginning of the Neolithic era, or the New Stone Age.
In the first cave he found fine painted pottery, polished axes, spindle whirls, clay and marble figurines, grinders and a collection of obsidian, chert and quartz tools.
The dark, back 'room', measuring about 150 square metres, appears to have been the main area of habitation. Evidence for hearth fires was found. And the floor was plastered with a mixture of burnt dung and red clay.
Karkanas suggests this type of plaster was unusual for the time, though it became popular later, and is still used today.
"Plaster made of dung, sometimes burnt, and clay is common today in some villages in Africa and India," he says.
He says the second cave "was probably used as a complementary activity area", sort of the prehistoric version of a tool shed.
Nine human burials discovered within the caves suggests some people may have lived their entire lives at the site.
Moving to the caves
Curtis Runnels, professor of archaeology at Boston University, says he finds Karkanas' paper to be "both informative and convincing".
"The move to caves came for many reason, among which was the reorganisation of the economy during this period to emphasise sheep and goat herding," he says.
"Part of the change was a focus on the production of wool and hair for textiles, which were traded for imported materials, possibly exotic flint or obsidian."
Runnels thinks people who wanted to practice both farming and herding moved to caves in the somewhat remote, agriculturally marginal regions.
Then, as the new find suggests, they settled down.

No longer the ninth planet: an artist's impression of Pluto and its moon Charon
This week's surprise decision to strip Pluto of its planet status has triggered a universe of reactions from astronomers, some philosophical, others downright shocked.
After heated debate among members of a 2500-strong meeting of the International Astronomical Union (IAU) in Prague, Pluto has been redefined as a 'dwarf planet'.
It is now considered a distinct object from the other eight traditional planets of the solar system: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.
Australian astronomer Dr Simon Johnston, from the Parkes Observatory in New South Wales is shocked at the decision.
"Up to a week ago I thought we had 12 planets," he says, referring to a definition released by the IAU last week that would have expanded rather than reduced the number of planets.
The overseer of science investigations on NASA's New Horizons mission to Pluto calls the reclassification rash and illogical. 
"I think people are going to consider Pluto a planet regardless," says Dr Alan Stern of the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado.
"What they did was scientifically ludicrous and publicly embarrassing," he says. "Pluto is a planet with clouds, weather and geology." 
Philosophical
But other astronomers are more philosophical, including Dr Mike Brown of the California Institute of Technology.
"Pluto is dead," says Brown, who in 2003 discovered an object larger than Pluto that many claimed was the 10th planet
Brown now accepts the icy rock, called 2003 UB313 and nicknamed Xena, will also be categorised as a mere dwarf planet under the new definition.
"Pluto would never be considered a planet if it were discovered today, and I think the fact that we've now found one Kuiper-belt object bigger than Pluto underscores its shaky status," says Brown.
"I'm of course disappointed that Xena will not be the 10th planet, but I definitely support the IAU in this difficult and courageous decision," he says. "It is scientifically the right thing to do, and is a great step forward in astronomy."
Several Johns Hopkins University astronomers describe the decision as a "muddled" ruling that is unlikely to settle ongoing debates over how to define a planet and whether the term should apply to Pluto. 
In an informal poll, only one astronomer was pleased to hear about Pluto's new status.
But at least one astronomer appears indifferent to the decision.
"The classification doesn't matter," says Dr Louis Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society. "Pluto, and all solar system objects, are mysterious and exciting new worlds that need to be explored and better understood."
Pluto fails the test
Pluto's status has been contested for many years by astronomers who say its tiny size and highly eccentric orbit precludes it from joining the other acknowledged planets. 
This discovery of Xena prompted questions as to whether Pluto and other largish objects could be considered planets or just simply rocks - rubble left over from the formation of the solar system.
The IAU defined the core difference between a planet and a dwarf planet as whether the celestial object has "cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit" - in other words, whether the object is massive enough to wield a gravity that draws in rocks and other debris that may clutter its orbital path. 
This criterion disqualified Pluto whose egg-shaped orbit overlaps Neptune's. 
The scientists also agreed that, to be called a planet, a celestial body must be massive enough for its own gravity to pull it into a nearly spherical shape, and it must orbit around a star while not itself being a star.
The large asteroid Ceres, along with Pluto and Xena, will also be defined as a dwarf planet. This is, according to the IAU, an important new class of trans-Neptunian objects. 
Around a dozen other objects are already dwarf candidates and all other objects, except satellites, will be known as "small solar system bodies" under the new definition.
Hate mail from angry children
Pluto was discovered in 1930 by a 24-year-old American astronomer, Clyde Tombaugh who died in January 1997, convinced he had achieved eternal recognition as the discoverer of the solar system's ninth planet. 
Tombaugh's announcement smashed the perceived boundaries of the solar system, established 84 years earlier with the discovery of Neptune.
This week's Prague vote will have similarly widespread public implications with models and textbooks of the solar system becoming instantly obsolete.
Officials at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, who have been at the vanguard of the movement to demote Pluto, say they have already received irate calls from the public.
"We had enormous numbers of telephone calls and I would say things that verged on hate mail from second-graders - very angry children who said, 'What have you done? This is the cutest, most Disney-esque of the planets. How could you possibly demote it?'" says Dr Michael Shara, the museum's astrophysics curator. 
"It's going to be a difficult thing to accept at first, but we will accept it eventually, and that's the right scientific and cultural thing to do," says Brown.
But at least one young visitor to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum, 15-year-old Quinn Huebner, is happy.
"It's one less planet to memorise," he says.

Torres Strait Islanders with diabetes may be placing their kidneys under further strain by eating dugongs contaminated with cadmium
High cadmium levels in dugongs and turtles in Australia's north may be affecting the kidneys of Torres Strait Islanders who eat these animals as delicacies, preliminary research suggests.
Research led by epidemiologist Dr Melissa Haswell-Elkins of the University of Queensland's North Queensland Health Equalities Promotion Unit suggests the cadmium may be worsening Torres Strait Islanders' diabetes-related kidney damage.
But until the team has more data, Haswell-Elkins is recommending Torres Strait Islanders keep eating these traditional foods. 
She says earlier studies have found that the cadmium comes from natural sources in the ocean, rather than industrial pollution, and concentrates in the liver and kidneys of dugongs and turtles.
Studies show cadmium levels in these long-lived animals are "well above" acceptable levels, Haswell-Elkins says.
This may be an issue, she says, as there is some suggestion that the kidneys of people with diabetes are more sensitive to being damaged by cadmium.
So her team investigated the possible impact of the cadmium from traditional seafoods on 122 Torres Strait Islanders, Indigenous Australians who are already at risk from kidney damage due to diabetes.
The researchers found that people who eat more dugong and turtle have more cadmium in their urine and also worse albuminuria, a marker of kidney damage in which high levels of the protein albumin are excreted in the urine.
The researchers think that cadmium in traditional foods could be contributing to diabetes-related kidney damage.
And they think health researchers should pay more attention to cadmium as one of the many factors that can affect kidney health.
But Haswell-Elkins says it's too early to say whether the cadmium is causing the kidney damage or whether already-damaged kidneys are simply allowing more cadmium to escape in the urine.
She says people should not be afraid of eating their traditional foods.
Until we understand how significant this source of cadmium is, she says, it is best to be more concerned about the well-established risk factors for diabetes such as hypertension, lack of exercise, poor diet, alcohol, obesity and smoking.
Some of the team's research has been published online in the Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology.

The fingertip device can sense acceleration and inertia to more accurately mimic a real finger
A fingertip device that recognises hand gestures and senses texture is being developed in the US.
The digitiser could one day input information without a keyboard; come in handy for gaming, where it could imitate squeezing a trigger; and be worn to paint on a screen by moving a finger through the air.
The 'Fingertip Digitizer', was developed by mechanical engineer Youngseok Kim and Associate Professor Thenkurussi Kesavadas, director of the University at Buffalo's Virtual Reality Laboratory.
They say it could be used for everything from inputting information into a computer or PDA to transferring the physical characteristics of an object to a computer for design purposes.
"With this device a computer, cell phone or computer game could read human intention more naturally," says Kesavadas.
"Eventually the Fingertip Digitizer may be used as a high-end substitute for a mouse, a keyboard or a joystick."
According to Kim and Kesavadas, other gesture-recognition devices available on the market can sense movement but not force.
And although there are several force-feedback, or haptic devices, none can measure details of dynamic fingertip activities, including acceleration and inertia.
"Our digitiser bridges the contact and non-contact input strategy," says Kim. "We keep track of everything happening on your fingertip."
After all, says Kesavadas, the fingertip is the most intuitive interface humans already posses. We use it to point, push buttons, touch objects and sense textures.
The duo's device is equipped with three sensors to give it a broad range of function.
A position sensor keeps tracks of where the digitiser is in 3D space and captures its direction. An accelerometer gauges speed, and a force sensor at the tip measures pressure.

Who needs ghostbusters when you've got Newton, says a scientist who has used physics and maths to poke holes in the way Hollywood depicts ghosts and vampires. 
In a paper, published recently on the physics website arXiv, theoretical physicist Professor Costas Efthimiou of the University of Central Florida shows that when it comes to things supernatural, the figures just don't add up.
For instance, the ability to walk through walls is a common talent of celluloid ghosts.
But Newton's laws of physics suggest that if a ghost can walk it shouldn't be able to pass through walls, say Efthimiou and Cornell University postgraduate student Sohan Gandhi.
Newton says a body at rest will remain at rest until it's acted on by an external force and for every action there is an equal but opposite reaction.
So in order to walk, we apply a backward force on the floor with our feet, propelling the feet up and us forwards.
But if a ghost can walk through walls, it must be "material-less", the authors argue, and incapable of exerting force.
By the same token, a ghost that can walk through walls should also sink through the floor, and a ghost that can walk should be bouncing off the walls it tries to pass through.
"The depiction of ghosts walking contradicts the precept that ghosts are material-less," they write.
Ghostly chills
Sharp drops in temperature are also associated with the arrival of a ghost.
But the paper says physics, which suggests that a sense of cold is correlated more to the rate at which heat is transferred from bodies to the environment than actual temperature, can provide an explanation. 
"It has become almost a Hollywood clich that the entrance of a ghostly presence be foreshadowed by a sudden and overwhelming chill," they write.
"This feature of supposed ghost sightings lends itself naturally to physical explanation."
Efthimiou and Gandhi say when a warm object is placed next to a cold object, energy flows from the warm body to the cooler body, cooling the warm body.
In a room with a high window or a door with a gap, the cool air from outside displaces warm air inside, creating a system of heat cycles and eddies.
The effect is increased because humans are more sensitive to rapid changes in temperature even if the absolute change is small.
A 2001 UK investigation of the famous Haunted Gallery at Hampton Court, by the University of Hertfordshire's Dr Richard Wiseman, found that hidden doors were letting in draughts.
This produced a combination of air currents that caused temperatures to plummet up to 2C in some parts, the paper says.
Blood suckers?
Efthimiou and Gandhi also use the mathematical principle of geometric progression to rule out the existence of vampires.
They argue it would take just two and a half years for vampires to wipe out the entire human race from the day the first one appeared, based on the myth that vampires turn their victims into other vampires by sucking their blood.
If vampires feed once a month, the great grandaddy of all vampires would have killed one human and produced one vampire in the first month. So in total there would be two vampires and one less human, or a tally of vampires 2, humans -1.
By the next month, the 2 vampires would kill 2 humans, and so on. 
After n months there would be 2 x 2 x 2 ... x 2 = 2^n, or a geometric progression with ratio 2.
"The vampire population increases geometrically and the human population decreases geometrically," they say.
Using the principle of reductio ad absurdum, they conclude that vampires can't exist as their existence contradicts the existence of humans.
Professor Alan Carey, dean of the Mathematical Sciences Institute at the Australian National University, says the paper successfully debunks the depictions of the supernatural in the movies.
"They poke holes in the clichs and mistakes that are made, and that's not too hard to do," he says.

Archaeolgists believe structures like the Tevaitau fort reflect hostility between population groups competing for resources
The Polynesians had trouble reaching remote South Pacific islands, according to a new study that dents their reputation as great seafarers.
An archaeological study shows they settled Rapa, an island southeast of Tahiti, more recently than anyone thought.
Professor Atholl Anderson, of the Australian National University, and international colleagues publish their research in the current issue of the journal Antiquity.
Dating of charcoal from archaeological sites on the 20 square kilometre island suggests the first settlers arrived at Rapa as late as around 1200 AD, Anderson says.
The findings come after dates for the settlement of nearby Easter Island were recently revised to around the same time.
"What these pieces of archaeological research show is that the more isolated islands were reached very late in the history of the settlement of the Pacific, indicating that probably the seafaring technology was not as good as we once thought," Anderson says.
"The Polynesians were once regarded as almost superhuman seafarers who could go anywhere that they wanted. But now it doesn't look like that at all.
"It looks like they actually had great difficulty finding these remote and isolated places."
Anderson says the Polynesians are believed to have radiated out from islands like Fiji, Tonga and Samoa to more remote islands like Rapa after a 1500 year migratory lull, driven further afield by population pressure and food shortages.
Mysterious forts
After Rapa was settled, the population rapidly increased and spread across the island, Anderson says.
Archaeological analysis of swamps shows signs of rapid deforestation and erosion along the coast, suggesting the population was running out of land to plant taro crops.
The population apparently splintered into competing groups that set up formidable stone forts, consisting of a central tower surrounded by domestic terraces. 
"It's always been a bit of a mystery as to why this very isolated island should have such a huge number of massive forts on it," Anderson says.
"The forts represent the time ... that it becomes a highly competitive society and ... they were simply fighting all the time."
Radiocarbon dating suggests they relocated from their coastal rock shelters to inland fortresses about 300 years after arriving and about 150 years before the first contact with Europeans in 1790.
The conclusions are based on 48 radiocarbon dates from a variety of sites, including five of the 16 known coastal shelters and four of the 15 fortifications.
A microcosm of the world
The University of Oregon's Assistant Professor Douglas Kennett, who co-authored the paper, says Rapa tells a compelling story of population expansion, environmental degradation and increasing warfare.
"Rapa is a little microcosm of our planet. There are lessons about the consequences of population growth to be learned there," he says.
Anderson says time has recorded a classic pattern at Rapa.
"The argument is if any population is confined it overuses its resources [and] the result of that is almost always competition between units, groups, families, and ultimately war."

In some parts of the world, it really is a man's world. Researchers say sex selection in societies that favour boys mean there are at least 80 million missing females
A preference for male babies and a resulting sex-ratio imbalance could lead to a destabilised society, researchers warn.
Their study in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences says the imbalance would leave more men unmarried, raising the risks of antisocial and violent behaviour.
The researchers say that parts of China and India would have 12-15% more men over the next 20 years, many of them in rural areas and with a limited education.
"The growing number of young men with a lack of family prospects will have little outlet for sexual energy," write Dr Zhu Wei Xing of China's Zhejian Normal University and Dr Therese Hesketh of the Institute of Child Health at University College London. 
"This trend would lead to increased levels of antisocial behaviour and violence, as gender is a well-established correlate of crime, and especially violent crime," they say, adding the trend would threaten stability and security in many societies.
Sex ratios are already distorted in large parts of Asia and North Africa, and sex-selective abortion and discrimination in healthcare for girls have led to higher female mortality. 
"There are now an estimated 80 million missing females in India and China alone," the researchers write. 
China introduced a one-child policy in 1979 to control population growth, but it has led to a rise in the male-to-female ratio from 1.11:1 in 1980-89 to 1.23:1 in 1996-2001, according to a study published this month in the British Medical Journal.
In 2004, 48.6% and 48.7% of the population in China and India, respectively, were female.
In contrast, females comprise 49.1% of the total population in East Asia, and 52.1% in all of Europe and Central Asia, according to figures from the World Bank. 
The authors called for measures to reduce sex selection and an urgent change in cultural attitudes, or dire consequences could follow. 
"When single young men congregate, the potential for more organised aggression is likely to increase substantially and this has worrying implications for organised crime and terrorism," they say.

This mite came to a sticky end millions of years ago in the Peruvian Amazon
Insects that became trapped in tree resin between 12 and 15 million years ago show that Amazonia hosted an astonishingly rich variety of life, French researchers say. 
The resin, which hardened into glass-like amber, has yielded at least 13 previously unidentified species of insects, three species of mites as well as more than 30 new species of algae, lichen and other microorganisms.
A team led by Dr Pierre-Olivier Antoine at the University of Toulouse publishes the research online today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
It is the third amber fossil find in South America, but the first in Amazonia. 
Of the 13 insect species, 12 belong to different families, which demonstrates that Amazonia was already hot, humid and a remarkable generator of biodiversity in the middle Miocene, an era that spanned 23 to about 5.3 million years ago, Antoine says.
Fossilised insects and microorganisms are extremely rare, as they do not have a tough internal skeleton like, for instance, dinosaurs, early birds or hominids.
As a result, these tiny fossils only turn up in exceptional finds, embedded in amber or in fine-grain chalky deposits. 
Three expeditions have been carried out to explore the amber deposit, which was found accidentally on the banks of the Amazon near the Peruvian city of Iquitos and is covered by river water for much of the year. 
About 100 fragments of amber, totalling around 500 grams have been recovered from the site and are still being analysed.
"To find so many species in such a small quantity of amber proves that at that time Amazonia had phenomenal biodiversity, close to today's," says Antoine. 
Some scientists have argued that Amazonia's broad variety of life was acquired relatively recently. 
The team, from France's National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), says that some of the specimens are so extraordinarily preserved that some cells appear to be undamaged. 
If so, there are hopes that enough DNA may be recovered from them to build a family tree of their genetic lineage, the CNRS says.

The emerging space tourism market has sparked the need to reassess what we really mean by space, a legal expert says
We need a legal definition of where space begins and ends to ensure future space tourists get what they pay for, says an Australian expert in space law.
Associate Professor Steven Freeland from the University of Western Sydney will speak about emerging issues in space law at a seminar next week.
Freeland says there are plenty of laws and treaties dealing with what we can and can't do in space. 
For example, it's illegal to claim territory in space or to use space for military or non-peaceful purposes.
But he says there's no actual legal demarcation of where space begins and the sky ends.
"The argument has always been why do we really care? Why do we really need to know?"
But he says new technology, including the prospect of a growing space tourism market, has given these questions a pressing new relevance.
"If we look at space tourism ... [people] are going to want a certificate that says 'I've been in space', not 'hey you've been very high up in the air'," he says.
"And from a commercial perspective the industry would love to be able to say 'you've been in space', because you're not going to pay US$100,000 to be very high up in the air."
What's a life worth in space?
Freeland says other space tourism issues potentially affected by whether a craft is in space or the air include insurance, liability, traffic control and rescue obligations.
Even the right to claim the term 'astronaut' may have to be revisited.
"[Some operators] say we'll all become astronauts and we'll get our astronaut wings.  But 'astronaut' is a term under space law," he says.
"Are you and I an astronaut just because we paid money to sit in this thing?"
Freeland says the existing space laws are badly in need of an overhaul because developments like space tourism were never envisioned at the time they were drafted.
"You have to have legal certainty [about] what law applies, whether it's international air law or international law of outer space or a combination of both," he says.
Who decides?
Currently decisions about matters like demarcation are made by the United Nations General Assembly on the basis of recommendations from its Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS).
COPUOS takes advice from bodies like the International Institute of Space Law, of which Freeland is a member.
He says while Australia set something of a benchmark in defining space as beginning at 100 kilometres above sea level under its 1998 space activities legislation, international bodies have been slow to act.
Freeland says demarcation was at the top of the list when COPUOS first met in 1962 but "here we are and we still don't have a legal demarcation".
He says major players in the space race, like the US, have resisted moves to pin down a definition of space, largely because it could restrict their ability to carry out certain activities that would be banned or limited under space law.

New Orleans houses swamped by floodwaters after Hurricane Katrina
In the year since the levees broke in New Orleans, scientists and engineers have found a lot of reasons for hope and despair about the future of Louisiana's coast.
The good news is that the solution may be in the Mississippi River itself.
The bad news is that some coastal areas, including New Orleans, could be sinking a lot faster than expected. Maybe too fast. Or maybe not.
First there's that murky Mississippi water. Mark Twain, who had a stint as a Mississippi riverboat pilot, reported that a glass of the fresh muddy river water was once considered "wholesomer to drink" than clear water of the Ohio River on account of the "yaller" mud.
In fact, each year the great river carries about 100 million tonnes per year of silt, sand and gravel through engineered channels, past New Orleans and into the depths of the Gulf of Mexico.
That's equivalent to 10 Superdomes packed tight with dirt, each year, says Denise Reed, professor of geology and geophysics at the University of New Orleans, who has been working on finding solutions for the coast.
Year in and year out, 100 million tonnes adds up to a whole lot of real estate flowing freely right into, then right out of, a place that is losing land at more than 120 square kilometres each year.
"Here we are, going cap-in-hand to Congress for money when our most valuable resource is being wasted," Reed says.
If, instead of being artificially channelled to the southernmost tip of the Mississippi Delta and dumped into deeper waters, most of that muddy water sediment were allowed to flow into the shallow surf zones further north, it would get caught up in the never-ending shoving match between the river and the sea.
Once there, as is the case along any shoreline near a river, ocean waves would serve as nature's free earth-moving machines and build up beaches that could protect the land from storm surf.
It's the very process that built the Louisiana coast in the first place, Reed says.
"The mother lode is still being wasted," she says. "We have got to keep it in the shallow water."
Muddy process
So just what kind of project would keep that liquid real estate in Louisiana, while at the same time protecting homes and cities, maintaining a navigable river and restoring the troubled Mississippi Delta wetlands?
That question is now the focus of feverish discussion and planning by Louisiana's brand-new Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority, or CPR Authority, says Robert Twilley, a professor of wetlands biogeochemistry at Louisiana State University (LSU).
Back in November, just two months after Katrina, the Louisiana State Legislature created the CPR Authority by blending together the state Department of Natural Resources and the state Department of Transportation and Development.
What this means, says Twilley, is that for the first time protection, which usually means buildings, is being integrated with restoration, which usually refers to coastal wetlands.
For decades the two goals have been largely perceived as opposites.
"It completely changed overnight our bedfellows," says Twilley. "It really has, in the last year, focused a very clear discussion on levees and wetlands as an integrated protection system."
The CPR Authority's first daunting task is to work with the various levee boards and the federal government to craft a comprehensive protection and restoration plan for the Louisiana coast.
The plan is to be gleaned from vast amounts of data and delivered to the public in January, Twilley says.
Muddy mystery
One of the most slippery and yet fundamental aspects of all that modelling and planning is figuring out subsidence, or just how fast the Louisiana coast is sinking and whether there is anything we can do about it.
Just as Katrina struck last year, scientists were in the midst of a stormy debate over subsidence, Twilley recalls. 
Rates of subsidence now range from just less than a millimetre per year to 170 times that rate.
Geologists know of at least three things that could be causing the ground to sink lower along Louisiana's coast.
One is the extraction of oil, gas and water from the ground, which was implicated last year in a US Geological Survey report. 
Another is the somewhat limited natural settling and compaction of river sediments that make up the ground.
Lastly, there are deeper 'tectonic' changes involving the rising and falling of shifting large blocks of real estate along faults, the sort of thing that's more common in fault-ridden places like California.
In April, Twilley's LSU colleague Professor Roy Dokka came out with a paper in Geology, in which he argued that faulting and what looks like a gigantic, slow-moving regional landslide is the cause of almost three-quarters of New Orleans' subsidence.
Dokka revised regional elevation data using precision Global Positioning System equipment and discovered a higher rate of subsidence over the past 50 years is almost all caused by this tectonic movement.
Then in July Geology published a paper by Tulane University's Associate Professor Torbj&ouml;rn T&ouml;rnqvist, who used an entirely different approach.
T&ouml;rnqvist surveyed long-buried wetland peat layers in outlying areas to come up with entirely different and milder subsidence rates.
"I think there is a very balanced dialogue going on," says Twilley of the two studies. "I have a lot of respect for both of them."
It's just the way science works, agrees Reed, and it's not surprising, considering that the two studies are so different in methods and the places they examined, she says.
Discovering the truth about subsidence is going to take a lot more work and a great deal of time, all of which Dokka, T&ouml;rnqvist and others are already investing at top speed.
Like the people of the CPR Authority, the Army Corps of Engineers, the levees boards and everyone else along the Louisiana coast, the subsidence researchers are urgently looking for answers so planners can make the right decisions and everyone can get to work before another Katrina-sized storm comes anywhere near.
"The problem is," says Twilley, "it takes a lot of time, and time we don't have."

An instrument on board this NASA satellite measured simultaneous vertical profiles of ozone and other compounds
Earth's protective ozone layer, which was notably thinning in 1980, may be fully recovered by mid-century, climate scientists say.
Ozone in the stratosphere, outside the polar regions, stopped thinning in 1997, the scientists found after analysing 25 years worth of observations. 
The analysis will be published in the Journal of Geophysical Research - Atmospheres. 
The ozone layer shields the planet from the Sun's harmful ultraviolet radiation. But human-made chemicals, notably the chlorofluorocarbons found in some refrigerants and aerosol propellants, depleted this stratospheric ozone, causing the protective layer to get thinner. 
The scientists say the ozone layer's comeback is due in large part to compliance with the 1987 international Montreal Protocol, which aimed to limit emissions of ozone-depleting chemicals.
"These results confirm the Montreal Protocol and its amendments have succeeded in stopping the loss of ozone in the stratosphere," says Dr Eun-Su Yang of the Georgia Institute of Technology, who led a team that analysed the data. 
"At the current recovery rate ... the global ozone layer could be restored to 1980 levels - the time that scientists first noticed the harmful effects human activities were having on atmospheric ozone - sometime in the middle of this century," Yang says. 
Researchers from NASA and other agencies reported in June that the so-called ozone hole over Antarctica would recover by around 2068, which is some 20 years later than previously expected. 
The Antarctic ozone hole is a massive loss of ozone that occurs each spring in the southern hemisphere. 
A similar, though smaller and less severe, ozone hole has been reported in the Arctic.
While ozone is a beneficial shield in the stratosphere, some 10 to 50 kilometres above Earth's surface, the ozone encountered at ground level can be damaging to lung tissue and plants and is a major component of smog.

This supernova, indicated by a white arrow, was caught exploding in real time
Astronomers say they have recorded a supernova in real time: the death explosion of a massive star that is typically only ever spotted days after the blast.
In studies that appear today in the journal Nature, four international teams of astronomers say the extraordinary blast was preceded by a short, sharp burst of gamma rays.
It provides the first confirmation of a theory that supernovae follow an "early warning signal" of this kind, they say. 
Supernovae occur when a huge, mature star runs out of fuel and catastrophically and explosively collapses in on itself.
The edge of a blast, called the shock breakout, is a wave of energy that ranges across the frequency spectrum.
In February this year, an orbiting US sentinel, the telescope Swift, picked up a gamma-ray burst (GRB) in a star-forming galaxy about 440 million light-years away, towards the constellation of Aries.
As it swivelled in the direction of the blast, Swift also relayed its discovery to major ground-based and space-based observatories.
The combined data from their sensors has been pieced together to give a picture about what happened over the next 17 days. 
After a supernova
GRBs have long been associated with the aftermath of supernovae.
They are typically huge releases in energy. In a few seconds, they can spew out more energy than the Sun will do in its entire expected lifetime of 10 billion years. 
But this GRB was highly unusual. It lasted almost 40 minutes, whereas a typical GRB only lasts a few milliseconds or tens of seconds at the most. It was also remarkably weak, a mild type of GRB known as an x-ray flash. 
The astronomers believe that this burst was a high-energy jet that pierced through the doomed star from its collapsing core. In essence, it was sending out a warning that a supernova was imminent. 
Suddenly, as the GRB faded away, the massive star blew itself into smithereens, sending out a "slightly aspherical" shockwave that rocketed across the heavens. 
The glowing remains
The star's glowing remains were confirmed optically two days later and classified as supernova SN 2006aj. 
"Usually these events are not detected until after the supernova has brightened substantially in the optical wavelength, many days after the initial  explosion," says Professor Keith Mason, chief executive of the UK's Particle Physics and  Astronomy Research Council, which operates an ultra-violet/optical telescope aboard Swift.
"But on this occasion we were able to study the remarkable event in all its glory, from the very beginning." 
One analysis, led by Alex Filippenko, a professor of astronomy at the University of California at Berkeley, suggests that the star had a mass of about 20 times that of the Sun before it blew apart. 
Neutron star or black hole?
The remains of a supernova can become a neutron star, a fast-rotating star that pulses with high energy.
Alternatively, in the case of very massive stars, it can form a black hole, an object whose gravitational pull is so great that not even light can escape from it.
Supernovae have played in important role in superstition and knowledge. 
A supernova spotted by the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe in 1572 and which lingered for a further 18 months helped overturn the notion established by Aristotle that the universe was fixed and unchanging. 
Tycho's star had such an effect on the popular mind that it reputedly was the inspiration for the celestial omen in Shakespeare's Hamlet. 
Warning
In a commentary in the journal, Assistant Professor Timothy Young of the University of North Dakota in the US says the research has shown that at least some GRBs are warnings of the imminent explosion of massive stars. 
"All four papers make clear that the exploding object sent out both a slightly aspherical shockwave, typical of a supernova, and a jet-like stream of material characteristic of a GRB," he says.

Molecules that mimic those in plants may be used to create organic solar cells
Synthetic molecules that mimic chlorophyll in plants may one day form the basis of highly efficient solar cells, say Australian researchers.
Professor Max Crossley's molecular electronics group at the University of Sydney recently presented its research at the International Conference on Porphyrins and Phthalocyanines in Rome.
"Nature has evolved this very efficient process, over millions of years, for harvesting light and then converting it into energy," says Crossley.
"We're trying to mimic aspects of natural photosynthesis."
Dense arrays of chlorophyll molecules in leaves are responsible for converting light energy to electrical energy and then to chemical energy.
Critical to this function of chlorophyll is the pigment porphyrin, which is attached to a central magnesium ion.
Crossley and team have made a synthetic form of chlorophyll that performs the first part of that process, converting light energy to electrical energy.
As in nature, when a large number of these synthetic molecules are arranged in a dense array they act in concert to efficiently collect photons of light.
"There has to be a lot of them because if there was only one it would be a very inefficient process," says Crossley.
Soccerball-shaped molecules
The researchers made a synthetic chlorophyll molecule shaped like a soccer ball.
It has a dendrimer scaffold, a highly branched nanosized polymer made of carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen.
Attached to the dendrimer are synthetic versions of the light-harvesting pigment porphyrin.
Spherical carbon molecules called buckyballs sit between the porphyrin and soak up electrons from the photons of collected light.
Crossley and team have used an array of the synthetic chlorophyll to build a prototype of an organic solar cell.
Based on what nature delivers, they expect to eventually have much more efficient solar cells than exist at the moment.
A leaf is about 30-40% efficient at converting light to electricity and this compares with just a 12% efficiency for conventional silicon-based solar cells.
"We have the basis of a biomimetic organic photovoltaic device or solar cell," says Crossley.
"In the long term what we're trying to do is have something we can simply paint on a roof, like a thin layer."
He says the team also hopes to make storage devices to replace metal-based batteries.
Nano efficiency
Crossley says conversion of light energy to electrical energy is most efficient when the molecules used to absorb the light are not too large.
Ideally, their size is around half the wavelength of the light being absorbed, which he says is 300 to 800 nanometres for visible light.
"You can't have a very thick material because light doesn't pass through it," says Crossley.
He says there are many groups using nanotechnology to build more efficient solar cells.
"It's a very hot topic," says Crossley. "So people are endeavouring to use all sorts of novel nanomaterials and ideas in order to achieve high efficiency in the generation of electricity from solar energy."
Team member and postdoctoral researcher Dr Deanna D'Alessandro is one of 16 scientists who are presenting their research to the public for the first time under the Fresh Science initiative.

Anger and hostility may affect hormones that in turn disrupt the immune system, causing chronic lung inflammation
Angry and hostile middle-aged men suffer accelerated wear and tear of their lungs, a new US study shows.
In 1986, Harvard School of Public Health doctors recruited 670 men aged 45-86, with the average age of 62.
The researchers assessed the doctors' hostility using a yardstick test called the Cook-Medley Scale and their lung power, determined by the volume of air expelled in a second. 
The volunteers were tested three times over the next 8.2 years on average. 
After filtering out factors that could distort the result, such as smoking and education, the researchers found that the men's hostility rating was closely linked to lung capacity. 
They reported the results in the journal Thorax.
Those who became more hostile suffered a more rapid decline in lung power than counterparts whose temperament remained unchanged or became more positive. 
Every point increase in hostility was associated with a loss of 9 millilitres in the air expulsion test.
Previous research has linked hostility and anger with heart disease, asthma, hypertension, irritable bowel syndrome and other disorders, although the exact causes are unclear. 
One theory is that anger and hostility affect hormone processes that in turn disrupt the immune system, causing chronic inflammation that damages tissue. 
But Dr Peter Lehrer of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey says that an association between hostility and lung function does not necessarily equate to cause.
"Personality, as well as physiology, can change over time, and deterioration in health and physical function can lead to negative emtions as well as vice versa, including for respiratory disease," he writes in a commentary in the same issue of the journal.

Some women with normal pregnancies have caesareans as a matter of choice
While it is rare for women in developed countries to die from childbirth, a new French study has found caesarean delivery more than triples the risk.
The findings are from a study led by Dr Catherine Deneux-Tharaux of the Maternite Hopital Tenon in Paris, published in the September issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology. 
"This study shows that caesarean delivery is associated with a three-fold increase in the risk of postpartum maternal death as compared with vaginal delivery," the researchers say.
There has been a continuous rise in the rate of caesareans in developed countries.
And some professionals have recently proposed elective caesarean delivery should be an acceptable first-choice method of delivery for women with normal pregnancy, say Deneux-Tharaux and colleagues.
But, they say, the increased risk of maternal death needs to be taken into account by clinicians and women when balancing risks and benefits of vaginal versus caesarean delivery.
Deneux-Tharaux and team looked at 65 maternal deaths that occurred between 1996 and 2000, and that were reported to a French confidential enquiry on maternal deaths. 
They compared these to a control group of 10,244 women selected from the French National Perinatal Survey.
All of the deaths followed births of a single child and were not due to conditions existing prior to delivery. The women had also not been hospitalised during pregnancy. 
The researchers found that the risk of death - from blood clots, infection or complications from anaesthesia - was 3.6 times higher for women who had caesareans.
The risk of death after childbirth was increased whether or not the caesarean was performed before the onset of labour or during labour.
The researchers say previous studies of the relationship between caesarean delivery and risk of maternal death have reported inconsistent results.
"Our objectives in this study were to provide a valid estimate of the risk," they say.
