For more information including updates and podcasts go to the ESA Venus Express website.

Unique conditions at the Sea of Galilee, or Lake Kinneret as it's also known, may have caused a patch of ice to form near its western shore, says an oceanographer
The New Testament says that Jesus walked on water, but a US professor says there could be a less miraculous explanation - he walked on a floating piece of ice.
Professor Doron Nof, a professor of oceanography at Florida State University, says his study found an unusual combination of water and atmospheric conditions could have led to ice formation on the Sea of Galilee.
He and his co-authors describe the local freezing phenomenon as "springs ice".
Nof used palaeoceanographic records of the Mediterranean Sea's surface temperatures and statistical models to examine the dynamics of the Sea of Galilee, which Israelis know now as Lake Kinneret. 
The study, published in the April issue of the Journal of Paleolimnology, found that a period of cooler temperatures in the area between 1500 and 2600 years ago could have included the decades in which Jesus lived.
A drop in temperature below freezing could have caused ice thick enough to support a human form on the surface of the freshwater lake near the western shore, Nof says.
This is an area where the researchers say many archaeological findings relating to Jesus have been found.
It might have been nearly impossible for distant observers to see a piece of floating ice surrounded by water. 
Nof says he offers his study as a "possible explanation" for Jesus' walk on water.
"If you ask me if I believe someone walked on water, no, I don't," Nof says.
"Maybe somebody walked on the ice, I don't know. I believe that something natural was there that explains it.
"We leave to others the question of whether or not our research explains the biblical account." 
Nof says the chance of similar icy conditions in northern Israel today is "effectively zero, or about once in more than 10,000 years".
When Nof offered his theory 14 years ago that wind and sea conditions could explain the parting of the Red Sea, Nof says he received some hate mail, even though he noted that the idea could support the biblical description of the event. 
And as his theory of Jesus' walk on ice began to circulate, he had more hate mail in his email inbox. 
"They asked me if I'm going to try next to explain the resurrection," he says.

If you catch bird flu then shop at your local market, the stallholder might need antiviral drugs as well as you
Giving antiviral drugs both as treatment to infected people and as prophylaxis to their close contacts provides the best chance of minimising the impact of a bird flu pandemic, new research suggests.
The Australian study found targeted prophylaxis would delay the onset of a pandemic, buying time to hopefully develop and distribute a vaccine.
But a treatment-based strategy would not significantly delay the onset of the disease or reduce the attack rate, the federal government-funded study found.
The study, by Dr James McCaw and Dr Jodie McVernon from the University of Melbourne, may be considered by health authorities if avian influenza A (H5N1) reaches Australia.
McCaw, a theoretical physicist, and McVernon, a paediatrician and research fellow, used a mathematical model to determine the optimal use of Australia's stockpile of 4 million doses of antiviral drugs during a pandemic.
The model examines differences between using antivirals as treatment once a person has bird flu to reduce their chance of dying and of transmission, and using drugs as post-exposure prophylaxis for those who have come into contact with an infectious person.
"The model says every time a new person becomes ill, 20 contacts need to be tracked down and given antivirals," McCaw told the Australasian Society of Infectious Diseases annual scientific meeting in New Zealand this week.
"Research indicates that on average the typical person will have 20 close contacts with people over a few days, 85% being relatives, friends and work colleagues and 15% being others such as shopkeepers and the bus driver."
The researchers defined a close contact as someone who had a two-way conversation within a metre of an infected person.
Mild or catastrophic?
Authorities won't know whether a pandemic will be mild or catastrophic until it hits, McCaw says.
The model indicates that if mild, treatment of those infected will reduce the number of people who become ill and slow transmission, and prophylaxis will delay the pandemic by several months, buying time to develop a vaccine.
"For a severe pandemic, the model shows that treatment fails to reduce the overall number of people becoming sick. It has benefits on an individual level by presumably reducing an individual's mortality but not at a population level," McCaw says.
"But prophylaxis continues to work by delaying exposure."
The federal Department of Health and Ageing and the National Health and Medical Research Council have contributed to this research as part of pandemic preparedness planning.

Many chickens have been culled to stop the spread of bird flu but experts say the next human flu pandemic is just as likely to come from elsewhere
Birds are not the only source of viruses that could become the next flu pandemic, say two Australian virus experts, who argue the 1918 Spanish flu virus came from mammals, not birds, as recently suggested.
And the researchers call for greater surveillance of flu viruses already in people or in other mammals such as pigs or cats.
Dr Mark Gibbs of the Australian National University and retired virologist Professor Adrian Gibbs report their argument today in the journal Nature.
"There's a huge focus on birds and that is good but we need to extend the surveillance," says Mark Gibbs.
In October last year, a team led by Dr Jeffrey Taubenberger of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in the US, reported in Nature that the Spanish flu virus, which killed millions around the world in 1918-1919, was a bird virus that leapt the species barrier into humans.
The researchers said RNA material from the 1918 virus, obtained from preserved tissue of victims of the pandemic, showed it was similar to bird viruses, including the deadly H5N1 strain, that is of such concern today.
Taubenberger and team also said their argument was supported by family trees constructed by comparing particular 1918 virus genes with equivalent genes from a broad range of viruses that have been found in other animals.
But Gibbs disagrees with Taubenberger's interpretation of his own virus family trees.
He says while it is true that the 1918 H1N1 strain originated in birds in the distant past, the question is when?
Recombination in mammals?
Taubenberger argues the 1918 virus came directly from birds without combining with viruses in other animals first.
But Gibbs says the family trees show the 1918 virus evolved from a virus that had already been in mammals for some time.
He says the fact that you get a different family tree depending on the virus gene used to construct it supports the idea that the 1918 virus was a result of virus recombination in animals like pigs, horses or cats.
Gibbs also says the virus may have been in humans 50 or 60 years before the pandemic, as suggested by studies showing some elderly people had immunity to the 1918 flu. 
He suspects it is a coincidence that the 1918 and bird flu viruses Taubenberger studied were so similar, citing a phenomenon known as parallel evolution.
"Wings have evolved in insects, birds, mammals and reptiles," he says. "But they haven't evolved from a common ancestor with wings. They've evolved wings independently.
"This happens in flu as well. In fact it's probably very common in flu but not well understood."
Focus on birds
Gibbs says Taubenberger's linking of bird flu and the 1918 pandemic increased alarm about bird flu.
"[But] the notion that the threat from influenzas only comes from birds is actually quite wrong," he says.
"There is a reasonable chance that the next pandemic may come from an influenza virus which is already in people or in pigs or in some other mammal," he says.
Gibbs says it is important to know what really happened in the 1918 pandemic because it was one of the most serious disease outbreaks in history.

This fishy creature, which was up to 3 metres long, walked on land with fins that have arm-like bones
Fossils of a 375 million year old species of ancient fish fill an evolutionary gap in the transition between water and land animals, scientists say. 
Remains of the new species named Tiktaalik roseae were found encased in frozen rock north of the Arctic Circle.
It has the fins and scales of a fish but its crocodile-like skull, neck and ribs resemble those of a land animal. 
"It is a fish that shows a surprising combination of characteristics of land-living animals," says Professor Neil Shubin, of the University of Chicago who's team publishes its discovery in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"This animal represents the transition from water to land - the part that includes ourselves," he says.
The nearly complete and very well-preserved specimens show the creature had sharp teeth, a jaw from 25 to 51 centimetres across and a flattened body that could reach 3 metres in length. 
"It shows us the stages by which land-living animals were constructed," Shubin says.
Blizzards and bears
The scientists battled freezing temperatures and blustery storms to get to the site on the remote Ellesmere Island more than 966 kilometres north of the Arctic Circle in Canada.
They also faced the threat of polar bears during their search for so-called elpistostegid fish, which are thought to be most closely related to tetrapods, land animals with limbs such as amphibians, reptiles, birds and humans. 
"Previous fossils representing this evolutionary event have really been fish with a few land characteristics, or land vertebrates with a few residual fish characteristics," says Dr Andrew Milner, of the Natural History Museum in London.
"These fossils show an animal that sits bang in the middle between the fish and land animals." 
What is generating the most excitement are joints in the fish's pectoral fins, which have bones that compare to the upper arm, forearm and primitive parts of the hand of land-living animals.
"Most of the major joints of the fin are functional in this fish," says Shubin.
"The shoulder, elbow and even parts of the wrist are already there and working in ways similar to the earliest land-living animals." 
The fossils also indicate that the transition from water to land occurred gradually in fish living in shallow water. They gradually developed features to live on land over time. 
Once was balmy
The sediment in which Tiktaalik was found has been dated to around 375 million years ago, in the swampy primeval era known as the Devonian. 
At that time, what is now frigid Arctic Canada had a balmy, sub-tropical climate, for it was part of a mega-continent that straddled the equator. 
Shubin believes that Tiktaalik's size and shape indicates that it was fitted for living in small streams in a delta system, an environment that probably encouraged the fish to venture into shallow water or even make forays onto land in search of food or shelter from predators. 
"The skeleton of Tiktaalik indicates that it could support its body under the force of gravity, whether in very shallow water or on land," says co-author Professor Farish Jenkins of Harvard University. 
"This represents a critical early phase in the evolution of all limbed animals, including humans - albeit a very ancient step." 
In a commentary in Nature, evolutionary biologists Professor Per Erik Ahlberg of Sweden's Uppsala University and Dr Jennifer Clack of the University of Cambridge hail the find as being quite literally ground-breaking.
The newly-discovered species owes its name to the Elders Council of Nunavut, which was invited by the scientists to propose a formal name. 
Tiktaalik, pronounced tic-TA-lick, is the word in the Inuktikuk language for "a large, shallow-water fish".

The test drug triggered a powerful immune response, leaving six trial participants seriously ill. But experts are still puzzled about what exactly happened and why animal studies gave no clue to this possible side-effect
An investigation into a UK drug trial that left six men seriously ill has found no evidence to suggest there was anything wrong with the drug or the way the tests were run, a regulatory body says.
In an interim report, the Medicines Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency says the problem appears to be due to an unprecedented biological reaction to the drug in humans that had not been seen previously in animal tests.
"Our main conclusion is that there was a powerful pharmacological action of this drug in man which was not detectable in the pre-clinical studies done in the non-human primate species, even in far higher doses," says the agency's chief executive Professor Kent Woods. 
The drug had previously been tested on rabbits and monkeys. 
As a consequence, the agency will not authorise any trials for similar drugs without taking external, expert advice. 
"This does not mean a standstill on such research but we feel that we need additional expert advice in certain areas relating to the authorisation of those studies," Woods says.
UK health secretary Patricia Hewitt also agreed to set up a group of international experts to examine the issue further. 
Trial by trial
Six men were left seriously ill at a hospital in north London on 13 March after taking part in the clinical study to test the drug TGN 1412, designed to treat chronic inflammatory conditions and leukaemia. 
Of the six, five have left hospital and one is making a good recovery. In the days after the trial, two of the men were described as critically ill with organ failure. 
The trial was run by US drug research company Parexel International Corp on behalf of German company TeGenero AG. 
At the time, Parexel said it had operated within regulatory guidelines and TeGenero said the response did not reflect the results obtained from initial laboratory studies.
Monoclonal antibodies 
TGN 1412 belongs to a class of drugs known as monoclonal antibodies, which specifically bind to target molecules. TGN 1412 targets and activates an immune system protein called CD28. 
"This is a complex scientific issue which raises important scientific and medical questions about the potential risks associated with this type of drug and how to make the transition from pre-clinical testing to trials in humans," the report says. 
The regulatory agency will now seek expert, external advice for any future phase one trials, when drugs are first tested on humans, involving monoclonal antibodies or other novel molecules targeting the immune system. 
Woods says it is vital that they learn lessons from the trial, which he describes as a "wholly exceptional occurrence". 
David Webb, professor of clinical pharmacology at the University of Edinburgh, says the report's findings could result in a change to the design of first phase trials for monoclonal antibodies. 
"One obvious difference might be to dose subjects sequentially rather than at the same time, which at the very least would minimise the number of subjects put at risk," he says.

A new form of silicon is said to be easier and cheaper to make than traditional silicon, yet works just as well. But will it be good enough for future generations of computer chips?
Japanese researchers have made a liquid form of silicon they say might one day be sprayed onto chips with an inkjet printer.
A team led by Masahiro Furusawa of Japan's Seiko Epson Corporation, says the new form of silicon is easier and cheaper to make than conventional silicon, yet works just as well.
The researchers report their work today in the journal Nature. 
The new form of silicon comprises cyclopentasiline, a silicon-based polymer that comprises five silicon atoms joined in a ring and is liquid at room temperature. 
Ultraviolet light is used to break open the bonds of some of the rings and let the molecules reform into long, placid chains that behave like viscous oil. 
The mixture is then diluted with a solvent like toluene, and is so fluid that it can be coated onto a surface by spinning, or even sprayed by an inkjet printer. 
The resultant liquid film is then baked at around 500&deg;C to turn it into a hard mosaic of flat silicon crystals whose semiconductor qualities are as good as the ultrapure slabs made by conventional refining, the researchers say.
In a review of the work in Nature, Associate Professor Lisa Rosenberg, a Canadian chemist at the University of Victoria in British Columbia, says the new  process has some drawbacks, as it still has to rigorously exclude air and water.
But she says the ability to make silicon film by inkjet is a clear breakthrough. 
"[It] will not provide the resolution necessary to pattern a high-density integrated circuit and therefore make a computer chip," she says. 
"But what it will certainly allow is the remarkably straightforward generation of simple, cheap and flexible circuits for displays, as well as a range of other applications - solar cells, x-ray detections and multi-analyte chemical sensor included."
Has silicon had its chips?
Analysts have long predicted the demise of silicon as a chip component due to the costs of purifying and processing it.
This usually entails taking highly purified natural silicon, which occurs in the mineral silica, and heating it in a vacuum to create a mist of free silicon atoms that then condenses onto a surface. 
This refining requires conditions to be ultra-clean, as an intruding speck of dust or thimbleful of unwanted gas molecules can ruin the outcome.
The complexity and cost have led to research into alternatives to silicon.
The Japanese team's method doesn't need high vacuums, high temperatures or ultra-clean environments.

It's possible to create order by introducing disorder, say researchers who have been working with computer models of swinging pendulums
Physicists have surprised their colleagues by turning chaos into order.
US physicists report how a network of interconnected pendulums can be made to swing in sync by being pushed at random times.
Sebastian Brandt and team at the Washington University in St Louis report their findings in the journal Physical Review Letters.
The researchers constructed a computer model of an interconnected network of pendulums that swing out of sync when they are pushed at the same time.
But when the pendulums are pushed at random, they swing in an ordered and synchronised way, the researchers report.
"The thing that is counterintuitive is that when you introduce disorder into the system - when the [forces on the pendulums] act at random - the chaos that was present before disappears and there is order," says Brandt.
The researchers say there is much to learn about the role of disorder in complex systems and suggest their work might be relevant to understanding synchronisation of neural activity in the central nervous system.
Their model system and neurones are both nonlinear, which means that there is no linear relationship between the amount of force applied and the response.
"When you hear your favourite music twice as loud you don't double the pleasure," says Brandt, explaining how one aspect of the brain, hearing, is nonlinear.
"This is of course basic research," he says. "But what you can learn from this is that complex systems ... sometimes behave in a very unexpected way, completely opposite to your intuition or expectation."
Surprising
Australian physicist Professor Joe Wolfe of the University of New South Wales says the findings are a surprise although not "counterintuitive".
"It's not really counterintuitive because one's intuition doesn't really work for such systems because they're complicated," he says. "Our intuition is good for dealing with simple things rather than complicated things."
Wolfe also says the research only has limited applications because the researchers used calculations with specific numbers rather than solving equations made up of symbols such as x and y.
This means they do not have a solution that can be used to understand every possible case, he says.
Inspiring a new theory?
Wolfe says ideally the findings would inspire someone to come up with a general theory to understand what was going on, but he says it is very hard to find mathematical solutions to complicated nonlinear systems.
And he thinks the idea that the research could help understand neurones is "drawing a long bow".
"A system of neurones is also a system of nonlinear things that interact in a way that you don't understand and produce sometimes surprising results," says Wolfe.
"I wouldn't say it's terribly relevant. It's just an interesting observation."

Penguins 60 million years old are closely related to today's yellow-eyed penguin, new DNA analysis suggests
New analysis of the world's oldest fossil penguins confirms some birds survived the mass extinction that killed the dinosaurs 65 million years ago, researchers say.
The penguins once lived in shallow seas off New Zealand's east coast 60 million years ago.
Now a molecular study, published in the journal Molecular Biology and Evolution, links them closely to modern penguins.
Co-author Associate Professor Ewan Fordyce from the University of Otago says penguins are specialised birds that evolved much later than other species.
"The fact that they have been found within a few million years of the dinosaurs' extinction is compelling evidence that modern birds must have evolved earlier and diversified during the time of the dinosaurs," he says.
"It also suggests that many of those bird lineages survived the catastrophe that wiped out the dinosaurs, so it's unlikely that there was a big turnover, with modern birds only emerging after the mass extinction."  
The study incorporates genetic evidence of the evolutionary relationships between penguins' distant cousins like shearwaters, albatrosses, ducks and moas.
The researchers used DNA from these birds to provide a broad framework of family relationships which, together with the fossil evidence, is used to predict when those birds must have arisen.
"We're really confident we have ancient birds and really confident about the date," says Fordyce.
"It's enabled us to establish an earlier timeframe for when groups of modern birds branched out."
Most of the New Zealand fossils, officially recognised as the Waimanu penguin genus, were discovered by amateur palaeontologist Al Mannering in the Waipara region just north of Christchurch.
Some 60 million years ago New Zealand had already separate from Australia and Antarctica and was a low-lying land mass much closer to the South Pole. 
Waimanu manneringi would have developed in a polar habitat similar to today's yellow-eyed penguin, which it closely resembles.
Its long bill and condensed wing bones indicate that it would be quite at home eating and swimming in today's Antarctica, the researchers say.

Ant from the genus Ectatomma foraging at the Project Amazonas field station in Peru
Ants evolved far earlier than previously believed, as far back as 140 million to 168 million years ago, US researchers report.
And these insects have plants to thank for their diversity, the Harvard University team reports today in the journal Science. 
The researchers used a genetic clock to reconstruct the history of ants and found the ant family first arose more than 40 million years earlier than previously thought.
But ants did not diversify into different genera and species until flowering plants came onto the scene, the researchers conclude.
The study sheds light on one of the most important and numerous animals, which includes hundreds of different species. 
"We estimate that ant diversification took off approximately 100 million years ago, along with the rise of flowering plants, the angiosperms," says team leader Professor Naomi Pierce.
"These plants provided ants with new habitats both in the forest canopy and in the more complex leaf litter on the forest floor, and the herbivorous insects that evolved alongside flowering plants provided food for ants." 
The researchers reconstructed the ant family tree using DNA sequencing of six genes from 139 ant genera, encompassing 19 of 20 ant subfamilies around the world. 
Such molecular clocks are widely used, alongside fossil and other evidence, to determine how old species are. They work on the basis that DNA mutates at a steady and calculable rate. 
The researchers found that the poorly known ant subfamily Leptanillinae is the most ancient, followed by two broad groups known as the poneroids, or predatory hunting ants, and the formicoids, the more familiar species such as pavement ants and carpenter ants.

The outer rings of Saturn (top) and Uranus (bottom), in which each system has been scaled to a common planetary radius
The newly discovered outer ring of Uranus is bright blue, for the same reason the Earth's sky is blue, astronomers say.
It's made up of tiny particles.
The ring is "strikingly similar" to Saturn's outer ring, which astronomers last month confirmed was probably generated by one of the planet's moons, Enceladus.
Like Saturn's ring, the Uranus ring also has a small moon in it, called Mab. But Mab is too small and too cold to be spewing a geyser of ice that contributes to the ring as Enceladus is now believed to be doing. 
"The outer ring of Saturn is blue and has Enceladus right smack at its brightest spot, and Uranus is strikingly similar, with its blue ring right on top of Mab's orbit," says Imke de Pater, a professor of astronomy at the University of California Berkeley, who helped lead the study. 
"I think there is no chance that the blue ring is caused by geyser activity," adds de Pater, whose report is published today in the journal Science. 
"We don't know what the composition of the particles is." 
Mab is probably covered with water ice, like the other moons of Uranus, but that has nothing to do with the ring's colour, says de Pater. 
"They are blue because they are tiny particles," she says.
"That is same reason why the sky is blue. You have little particles that scatter light as blue light." 
Most other rings around planets in the solar system are red, because of the size of their particles. 
This is why astronomers missed Uranus's outer ring for so long; scientists were looking for it in the infrared light spectrum.
Throwing up debris
The scientists believe that meteoroids hitting Mab's surface throw up debris. The larger pieces remain in the moon's orbit and eventually are swept up, but smaller ones drift around more and eventually make up the ring. 
The blue ring was only seen after researchers compared notes from near-infrared observations by the Keck Telescope in Hawaii and visible-light photos taken by the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope. 
Now they are looking for rings around other planets, including Mars.
Rings are always easier to see when they are edge-on, de Pater says.
"The interesting thing with Uranus is that in 2007 the rings will appear edge-on," she says. "In 2007 the rings will be 100 times brighter." 
Saturn's rings
A second paper, published in Geophysical Research Letters, shows that Saturn's prominent A ring contains more debris than once thought. 
The Cassini-Huygens spacecraft now orbiting the planet has sent back ultraviolet images that show the ring is 35 times thicker than originally thought. 
A team at the University of Colorado at Boulder says the particles making up the ring range in size from dust grains to chunks as big as buses, and orbit in long stringy clumps. 
The same spacecraft helped planetary scientists discover the geyser on Enceladus, leading to speculation that the moon has a liquid water source under its frozen surface.

A new study shows we can only tolerate freeloaders for a short time. After that societies prefer to punish them
The idea of a happy, cooperative society in which no one gets punished falls apart as soon as a few freeloaders show up, a new study shows.
Although most volunteers in the study first chose to join a group that did not use punishment, most eventually left for a group that fined transgressors.
Researchers from the University of Erfurt in Germany and the London School of Economics report their findings today in the journal Science.
The study can help us understand how to make society work more smoothly and can help in designing policies aimed at ensuring cooperation, writes Assistant Professor Joseph Henrich, a US anthropologist at Emory University in Georgia, in a commentary.
"Even if nearly everyone is initially cooperative and contributes, free-riders can profit and proliferate, leading to the eventual collapse of cooperation," he writes.
For example, if most people in society are brave or conserve petrol, he explains, others benefit by evading military service or driving petrol-guzzling cars.
Playing games
In the study, researchers asked 84 students to join one of two groups to play a game with tokens. One group of players punished members who did not share freely, while the other group did not. 
The students could choose which group to join. 
"Each player is endowed with 20 money [tokens] and may contribute between 0 and 20 [tokens] to a public good," the researchers write.
"Each group member equally profits from the public good, independent of his or her own contribution." 
In the punishment group, members could choose to fine other members three tokens, but it cost them one of their own tokens to do so. 
Two-thirds of the students initially chose the group in which members could not punish others, but many abandoned that group when they saw those in the punishment group were prospering more. 
And former freeloaders were some of the most enthusiastic converts to the punishment mode, the researchers found. 
"You can't explain this dramatic change in behaviour by saying that people are just looking for the best pay-off. People gave up pay-off to follow the cooperative norm," says Erfurt researcher Dr Bettina Rockenbach. 
Punishing the freeloaders
Dr Bernd Irlenbusch of the London School of Economics adds he was surprised with the extent of punishment.
"I was surprised so many of the freeloaders exerted punishment on others when they entered the sanctioning institution," he says. 
When the game ended after 30 rounds, the people in the punishment group had donated an average 18 tokens per round.
Meanwhile the live-and-let-live group had almost no members and those who remained donated three tokens to the public good on average per round. 
Little actual punishment was applied during the later rounds of the game, apparently because the threat of punishment was enough to ensure cooperation, the researchers say.

A female Australian redback spider eating a male spider
Australian redback spiders sniff out how much competition they have for females as they're growing up, and tailor their adult size accordingly, say Canadian researchers.
Michael Kasumovic and Dr Maydianne Andrade of the University of Toronto report their findings in the latest issue of the journal Current Biology.
"Males are really tracking the selection pressures that they're facing in an environment. They're aware of male density and the amount of competition they're going to be facing," says Kasumovic.
Like most spiders, male redback spiders are much smaller than the females but they vary in size.
Kasumovic and Andrade have found that an individual spider's development is determined by a trade-off between traits that benefit a spider's sexual success versus their longer term survival.
"A trait that's good for sex is often not good for surviving and a trait that's very good for surviving may not be good for sex," says Australian spider expert, Dr Marie Herberstein, of Macquarie University in Sydney.
The classic example is the male peacock's tail, she says, which is good for attracting females but weighs him down and affects his chances of survival when being pursued by a predator.
She says Kasumovic and Andrade have found that when it comes to the redbacks, maturing early is good for their sexual success but maturing later is better for survival.
The study
Kasumovic and Andrade studied how immature male redbacks develop in the presence and absence of females. 
They found that when females are not around, the males develop into sexually mature adults slowly, growing into relatively large adults with lots of energy stores.
This gives the male spiders a higher chance of survival when they set out on their search for female mates, the researchers say.
But when male spiders are surrounded by females, they focus their energy on maturing quickly, ending up both smaller and leaner because they have spent less time foraging.
Kasumovic and Andrade say growing up fast gives the spiders the best chance of being first to mate with the nearby females, something that is important considering the sex life of redbacks.
Males redbacks only have one or two chances to mate before they are killed by the female, and mating is most successful when the female is a virgin.
"Everybody always states that the small males are a by-product of them not being able to get enough resources, but we're showing that they're intentionally developing that way," says Kasumovic.
Small and fat
The researchers found that when both females and males are around, male redbacks also grow up fast and small. But they have more fat stores on their body than when other males were not around.
The researchers suspect that this extra fat gives the males the endurance to compete with other males for the extended courtship rituals that females prefer.
Males are supposed to pluck and vibrate a female's web strings for up to eight hours in the hope of gaining their favour.
In the experiment, the males could not see or touch the females or males around them. This means the spiders were responding to pheromones, literally sniffing out their mates and potential competition.
A choice of strategy
Herberstein says the new research shows that male spiders choose which strategy to pursue depending on how they assess their environment as they're maturing.
"Through this developmental plasticity, the males can tailor their development depending on the situation they find themselves in," she says.

Playing violent video games can change the way you think, a study says
Playing violent video games can make you think other people are out to get you, research shows.
Dr Sonya Brady of the University of California, San Francisco, and Professor Karen Matthews at the University of Pittsburgh say their study shows that young men are more likely to see others' attitudes toward them as hostile if they've just played a violent game. 
"You're kind of on the lookout for other people being rude to you," Brady says. 
Brady and Matthews had a group of 100 male undergraduates aged 18 to 21 play one of two popular video games.
One game involved car theft and bashings and the second one pitted the player in a race to get homework to school on time.
In the non-violent game, players took the role of a parent and their task was to deliver their child's science project to school before it could be marked late.
In the violent game, players took the role of a criminal, and were instructed by the mafia to beat up a drug dealer with a baseball bat. 
Are you accusing me?
After playing the games, study participants watched a scenario in which a teacher tells a class he suspects some students have cheated in a test.
The teacher says he is very disappointed in those who have cheated but proud of those who did well. 
The teacher then asks to see "Billy" after class. 
The study participants were told to imagine themselves as Billy, and were asked how likely it was that the teacher was going to accuse them of cheating.
Students who'd played the violent game were more likely to think they'd be accused of cheating, the researchers report in the Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine. 
More likely to approve of marijuana
Brady says the study also shows young men are more likely to think it's acceptable to smoke marijuana and drink alcohol after playing a violent game.
She says this suggests that violent video games make players more likely to throw caution to the wind, whether it's with regard to their own health or any other type of risky behaviour.
"Parents have been told the message that violent video games and violent media in general can influence the likelihood that their kids will be aggressive," Brady says.
"What this study suggests is that they might increase any type of risk-taking behaviour."
Playing the violent game boosted young men's blood pressure, and appeared to have more of an effect on those who came from more violent homes or communities, the study says.
But regardless of whether they grew up in a violent environment, the young men who had played the violent game were less cooperative and more competitive in completing an assigned task with another person, compared to those who played the non-violent game.
The results show the potential for video games to change the way we think, Brady says.

A pump that extracts heat from sewage is being used to warm homes
Norwegians can now heat their homes and offices by flushing the toilet.
The sewage heat pump plant, which began operating last week, uses fridge technology to tap heat from raw sewage and direct it back to the country's capital Oslo.
Machines at the end of a 300 metre long tunnel in a hillside in central Oslo suck heat from the sewer and transfer it to a network of hot water pipes feeding thousands of radiators and taps in the city.
Similar systems have been used in other parts of the world but the Norwegians say theirs is the biggest.
"We believe this is the biggest heating system in the world using raw sewage," says Lars-Anders Loervik, managing director of Oslo energy company Viken Fjernvarme, which runs the plant. 
The pump uses a system of compressors and condensers and generates 18 megawatts, enough heat to warm 9000 flats or save 6000 tonnes of oil a year, he says. 
 Exploiting sewage
Untreated sewage from toilets, bathtubs, sinks and rainwater from the streets flows into the system at 9.6&deg;C and comes out at 5.7&deg;C after heat is extracted with a refrigerant. 
The energy goes to warming to about 90&deg;C the water in a 400 kilometre pipe system fed to offices and homes, from a temperature of 52&deg;C when it reaches the sewerage plant.
Industrial waste burning plants also heat the water.  
About a third of the heat energy comes from electricity driving the system and the other two-thirds is the heat from the sewer. 
Dr Monica Axell, head of the International Energy Agency's heat pump centre, says the concept could be a feasible solution for many cities as long as they have the necessary infrastructure.
The only problem with the system is that flow in the sewers tends to be irregular.
Monday mornings between 4am and 6am are especially dry in Oslo because residents go to bed early on Sunday.
But on weekends the flow is good, says project manager for the Oslo plant Oyvind Nilsen.
"When people have been out to parties there's a lot of beer going into the sewer," he says. 
Among other sewage energy projects worldwide, US scientists are looking to generate electricity from sewage-eating bacteria.
"The microbial fuel cell work is going well, but we still are not out of the lab on this technology," says Professor Bruce Logan of Pennsylvania State University.

More search results aren't the answer. We need targeted results, experts say
Google's new search engine technology won't solve all the problems of finding what you need but it's a small step in the right direction, information retrieval experts say.
The company has paid an undisclosed amount to license a new type of search algorithm, recently designed in Australia by University of New South Wales PhD student Ori Allon.
The search tool, Orion, has been touted as the biggest thing in searching the web since the development of the Google page rank algorithm by two Stanford University researchers in the early 1980s.
Little has been disclosed about the software because of commercial confidentiality.
But the man who worked with Allon to market his research says the system will make searching the net faster and easier.
"When you put in a query it comes up with a list of associated keywords that specify your search to a greater depth," says Andrew Stead, business development manager of the NewSouth Innovations, the commercial arm of the University of New South Wales.
"It actually goes into sites and extracts ... text so you can just scroll down a single page and derive the information you were looking for.
"Traditionally you've have to click through to the site, but this means you don't have to click through and find that the site's incorrect."
Luxury cars or football?
For example, a search for a particular model of luxury car comes up with where to buy one, a review of the car itself and an overview of the car manufacturer.
Stead says the search is best suited to information-based queries, such as the rules of Australian Rules football, rather than finding the home page of the Australian Football League.
But even Stead says it's not the end step in perfecting internet searches, which some research suggests cover as little as just 5% of the web.
 "Search has got a long way to go before it's going to give us what we want and this is one step in that path," he says.
Ranking pages
Dr Peter Bailey is project leader of the CSIRO's information retrieval project and has been involved in designing a search engine designed for use within organisations.
Like Stead, he says it appears that Allon's model has gone some way to addressing one of the biggest problems of searching the internet, which is how information is ranked.
Bailey says search engines work by trawling the net for documents on public websites.
The documents are then copied to form a sort of reverse index where words are linked to massive indexes of documents.
This is why the key to successful searching is ranking the material to reflect the needs of the searcher, he says.
Bailey we're still far from the perfect search engine, and current systems only address about 5% of the problems involved in trawling the web for information.
The Holy Grail of internet searching includes tailoring searches to individuals, accessing the whole internet and providing the perfect answer, something he says may be as elusive as it is desirable.

Graffiti is the modern equivalent of cave art, an expert says. Both are produced by young men with adrenaline and sex on their minds
Testosterone-fuelled boys created most prehistoric cave art, according to a book by one of the world's authorities on this type of art.
The theory contradicts the idea that adult, tribal shaman spiritual leaders and healers produced virtually all of it. 
It also explains why many of the images drawn in caves during the Pleistocene, between 10,000 and 35,000 years ago, somewhat mirror today's artwork and graffiti, largely produced by adolescent males. 
"Today, boys draw the testosterone subjects of a hot automobile, fighter jet, Jedi armour, sports, direct missile hit, etc - all of the things they associate with the adrenaline of success," says Professor R Dale Guthrie, author of The Nature of Paleolithic Art. 
"I think the full larder [of] success of the excitement and danger of killing a giant bison or auroch in the Pleistocene was the equivalent of the testosterone art today," says Guthrie, who is an emeritus professor in the Institute of Arctic Biology at the University of Alaska Fairbanks.
He says that many of the cave art images of animals are rather graphic, showing, for example, speared animals with blood pouring out of their mouths and noses. 
But hunting and animals were not the only things on the cave artists' minds.
Guthrie has also noticed that males were drawn with no defined sexual parts save for a simple line designating the penis. Few men were even represented, but the images of women in caves tell a different story. 
"Female images dominate and are nude, almost every one full-figured above and below," says Guthrie.
"Unlike the other animals, the sculpted, engraved and painted human females and female parts are sometimes done schematically, distilling and inflating the primary and secondary sex characters." 
Learning to draw
Guthrie also determines that several cave art images are incomplete, overlapping, brief and rudimentary, as though the people who created them were still learning to draw. 
This type of sketching dominates cave walls, which also display a handful of works that appear to have been drawn by well-practiced artists, who were probably adults. 
Perhaps the most convincing piece of evidence for the new theory consists of 200 handprints that were left in the caves next to the art.
These prints were produced by people who chewed ochre, held up a hand, and then spit the colorful orange-yellow spew all over the hand, leaving a wall imprint. 
Guthrie analysed the handprints and then compared the results with earlier research on male and female hands.
The hand lengths, palm widths and the finger widths and lengths mostly match hands that would have belonged to boys aged nine to 17. 
Some teen female handprints were identified in the caves, but young male prints were more common. 
Other handprints resulting unintentionally from people leaning against muddy cave walls, as well as footprints, also suggest that young boys were creating the cave art, according to Guthrie. 
Paul Martin, professor of quaternary biogeography at the University of Arizona, says he is inclined to agree with the new theory and findings.
"[Guthrie] has an extraordinary knowledge of wild animal ecology globally, and especially in the northern hemisphere," Martin says.
"In addition, he brings detailed knowledge of late Pleistocene fossils to his study of cave art. Finally, like many zoologists, especially those with children of their own, he is an astute observer of human behaviour.
"If he finds that much cave art reflects teenage or preteen preoccupations, I am prepared to believe him," he says.

This pampered pooch walks the same way as a greyhound or a labrador. But why is the US military interested?
Labradors and dachshunds appear to waddle, while greyhounds seem to march by with a fast clip.
But new research shows the basic mechanics behind dog walking is the same for all canines. 
The discovery could lead to a better understanding of health issues related to the way dogs walk, like hip problems, the researchers say.
And it could also result in improvements to four-legged, dog-like robots, which the US military is already investigating.
"The big benefit would be to show how robot dogs should walk more efficiently," says lead scientist Dr Jim Usherwood, a researcher from the Structure and Motion Laboratory at the University of London's Royal Veterinary College.
"Almost all robots require a large amount of power - much higher than an animal would use - partly because they tend to use bent legs. I show what would happen with stiff legs," Usherwood adds.
Inspired by stiff-legged mechanical toys that can walk down hills, Usherwood and his team designed several different computer models for dog walking. The researchers then compared these models with observations of actual dogs on a treadmill. 
Their simple, passive, stiff-limbed computer model best matched and explained the principles underlying dog walking. 
The findings were recently presented at the annual meeting of the  Society for Experimental Biology in the UK. 
Like controlled falling
Walking for both bipeds and quadrupeds is like controlled falling because, with each step, the individual leans forward and is 'caught' by an outstretched limb.
As a result, there is a stage when the body is high and slow, and a stage when the body is lower and faster, Usherwood explains. 
"With a four-legged animal, this has broadly been observed before, but it had not been clear why and when these motions should happen," he says.
"My passive model makes it much easier to understand when and why the body moves up and down and changes in speed." 
The model also found that walking happens on relatively stiff limbs, unlike trotting, where a dog's legs function like springs and tend to bend more. 
This is true for bipeds such as humans. But he says people put more energy into extending their legs, while dogs appear to power themselves with torque around their hips, similar to how weight is distributed on a bicycle. 
Dogs, particularly older, arthritic ones, often suffer hip problems because if any two bones within the hip region lose their normal position, the abnormal areas can grind against each other with each step. 
Over time, abnormally shaped bone can grow and inflammation sets in. Since one condition fuels the other, it becomes a vicious cycle.
Usherwood hopes his model could help to clarify how this deadly cycle begins and worsens, which eventually may lead to improved diagnosis and treatment. 
Harvard University scientists have come to similar conclusions regarding the mechanics behind dog walking.
Russell Main, a Concord Field Station researcher, believes that dog legs work like two inverted pendulums, where mechanical energy is usually recovered with each stride. 
Dr David Lee and Professor Andy Biewener, also at Harvard, have already built a robot resembling a headless dog, called BigDog, that uses similar principles. 
According to Boston Dynamics, a research group involved in the project, BigDog so far has trotted at about 5 kilometres per hour, climbed a 35&deg; slope and carried about 54 kilograms.
In the future, the US military, which is helping to fund the research, hopes to use BigDog for rescue operations and other possible fieldwork.

If your sex life isn't all smiles and fireworks, are you sick or just going through a rough patch? And what's a normal sex life anyway?
Consumers are being marketed drugs for premature ejaculation without good evidence there is a medical problem to be treated, an Australian conference heard this week.
US-based psychologist and sex therapist Dr Leonore Tiefer, of the New York University School of Medicine, told the Inaugural Conference on Disease-Mongering in Newcastle this week, that premature ejaculation is "the next sexual dysfunction" to be marketed by the pharmaceutical industry.
This concerns Tiefer because she says sexual difficulties are generally not biological problems that need medical treatment.
"There's no sickness, there's no pathology, nothing is broken," she says. 
She says when men and women are counselled about what is distressing them sexually, rapid ejaculation is of low importance.
Tiefer says the way premature ejaculation is being marketed as a condition in need of treatment has "all the hallmarks of disease mongering". 
First, she says, drug company-sponsored messages in the media have led to growing public awareness that premature ejaculation is regarded as a problem by experts who are measuring it, defining it and finding cures for it.
These messages include "help-seeking" advertisements that urge people to "ask your doctor" about solutions to the problem. 
"The disease-awareness campaign is in full force at this point," says Tiefer.
What's normal?
She says as a result people are now asking doctors what the normal speed of ejaculation is, and wondering whether they meet the normal standard.
"The answer is there is no such thing as normal," she says. "There's a range. Some people are quick, some people are slow. Most people are in the middle."
She says although there are no drugs yet specifically approved to treat premature ejaculation, doctors are treating the condition with available drugs that are known to slow down the speed of ejaculation.
"Doctors are getting a lot of medical education about the off-label uses of these drugs," she says. "There are articles published, there are conferences organised around this and there are drug company-paid people going out there and saying you can use this for this."
Tiefer says health and science journalists are also writing about premature ejaculation and the help available for it.
Poorly defined
Australian sociologist Dr Ross Morrow of the University of Sydney, who also spoke at the conference, agrees premature ejaculation is a "suspicious condition".
"To me this is a condition that is a very questionable medical category," he says, adding that the condition is "poorly defined". 
He says over the years there has been an attempt to define premature ejaculation according to the amount of time that lapsed, or the number of thrusts that occurred, before ejaculation occurred, but no agreement has ever been reached.
Morrow says the American Psychiatric Association defines it as persistent and recurrent ejaculation either before a man has intercourse, during attempts at penetration or very shortly after intercourse begins, in a way that is distressing to him or his partner.
And he says the definition relies on a clinician's judgement about whether the ejaculation is occurring too soon or not.
Norms changing over time
Morrow also says norms about when men should ejaculate during coitus are constantly changing.
For example, he says, a study in 1948 by Alfred Kinsey discovered three-quarters of men ejaculated within two minutes of coitus and regarded this as acceptable.
"He didn't think that was a dysfunction," says Morrow. "He actually thought that was a sign of men being sexually responsive."
But Morrow says during the 1960s the period of time to ejaculation considered normal by experts was extended.
He says this coincided with a belief that women's lack of sexual satisfaction during intercourse could be addressed if her male partner could take longer to ejaculate.
Morrow also says different cultures have different norms about how long men should take to ejaculate, citing the case of one Melanesian culture that considers ejaculation after 15 to 30 seconds normal.
Morrow says in Australia premature ejaculation is often mentioned in the same advertisements discussing erectile dysfunction, and is sometimes referred to under the banner of "ejaculatory problems".
He says antidepressant drugs used to delay or inhibit ejaculation are being currently used in impotency clinics in Australia and sex therapists are also treating the condition using cognitive behavioural therapy.
Female premature ejaculation?
Both Tiefer and Morrow are also concerned about the notion of "rapid orgasm", the female equivalent of premature ejaculation.
"I think it's part of a transformation of sex from a subjective experience into a concrete performance, almost like a sport with rules and goals and achievement standards," says Tiefer. 
"So you can define very clearly whether your performance is up to part and in that way products can be provided for you to achieve performance ore even exceed those expectations."

Caulobacter crescentus uses its stalk to stick to solid objects
Harmless bacteria that live in rivers produce a biological superglue stronger than any ever measured, scientists say.
Researchers reporting recently in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, say the microorganism Caulobacter crescentus sticks to surfaces three to four times more strongly than synthetic superglue.
The bacteria holds the secret for understanding how to prevent harmful bacteria from sticking to human tissue and causing disease, the researchers say.
It also may help to produce a nontoxic superglue that could be used for anything from a dental adhesive, to an industrial glue that works underwater, to a surgical glue. 
"The advantage here is that these bacteria live in water and so they bind to all sorts of surfaces in water," says team member Yves Brun, professor of biology at Indiana University. "This means that this glue is very versatile." 
Biologists including Brun regularly study C. crescentus as a biological model for understanding how other bacteria function.
Over the course of other experiments, Brun realised the holding power of the tiny critters, which attach themselves to surfaces with a stalk-like appendage.
Genes for stickiness
To zero in on how they do it, Brun and his team began genetically manipulating the bacteria to remove specific genes needed to produce the adhesive. 
Eventually, the scientists realised that variations of C. crescentus lacking the genes required to produce chains of sugar molecules at the ends of the stalks could not hold fast to surfaces. 
The scientists determined that the polysaccharide is a critical component of the adhesive.
They think that the sugar molecules are attached to super-sticky proteins, but they have yet to confirm which ones. 
They also have indirect evidence that either there are other adhesive molecules involved or that the polysaccharide is somehow modified to make it stickier, says Brun.
How strong is the glue?
The researchers did, however, confirm just how tenacious the bacteria are.
Jay Tang, an assistant professor of physics at Brown University and his team stepped in to help measure the force required to pull the bacteria off a flexible glass pipette. 
The researchers found that a single bacterium could withstand a stress of 0.11 to 2.26 micronewtons.
In other words, the amount of bacteria that fit onto an Australian 20 cent piece (or a US quarter) could withstand being pulled by a force of four to five tonnes, about the mass of an adult elephant.
The team also found enzymes that work to unglue the bacteria from a surface.
"The work by the group at Brown is exciting in its implications for better understanding natural adhesives and also in possible translation to new synthetic adhesives," says Professor Dennis Discher of the Biophysics and Polymers Lab at the University of Pennsylvania. 
According to Brun, ultimately the bacteria would not be used as a glue itself, but to produce the adhesive.
Before that can happen, the scientists have to pinpoint the genes required and devise a method for getting the bacteria to produce the glue in large quantities.

Australopithecus anamensis fossils include teeth, upper jaws, hand and foot bones, vertebral fragments, a thigh bone and fragments of skull and jaw
An international team of scientists has discovered 4.1 million year old fossils in eastern Ethiopia that fill a missing gap in human evolution. 
The teeth and bones belong to a primitive species of Australopithecus known as Australopithecus anamensis, an ape-man creature that walked on two legs. 
The Australopithecus genus is thought to be an ancestor of modern humans. Seven separate species have been named and Au. anamensis is the most primitive. 
"This new discovery closes the gap between the fully blown Australopithecines and earlier forms we call Ardipithecus," says Professor Tim White, from the University of California, Berkeley, who's team reports its find today in the journal Nature. 
"We now know where Australopithecus came from before 4 million years ago." 
The fossils were unearthed in the Middle Awash area in the Afar desert of eastern Ethiopia. 
The area, about 230 kilometres northeast of Addis Ababa, has the most continuous record of human evolution, the researchers say. 
The remains of the hominid that had a small brain, big teeth and walked on two legs, fits into the one million-year gap between the earlier Ardipithecus and Au. afarensis.
The famous fossil skeleton Lucy, which lived between 3.6 and 3.3 million years ago and was found in 1974, is an example of Au. afarensis.
"It is fair to say that some species of Ardipithecus gave rise to Australopithecus," says White.
Fossil find
The fossils from about eight individuals include the largest hominid canine found so far, the earliest known thigh bone of the species and hand and foot bones. 
The finding also extends the range of Au. anamensis in Ethiopia. Previous remains of the species were found in Kenya. 
White says the large teeth suggest the hominid could eat fibrous foods and roots, compared to earlier species of Ardipithecus that had smaller teeth, which restricted their diet.
Along with the hominid fossils, the scientists discovered hundreds of remains of pigs, birds, rodents and monkeys as well as hyenas and big cats which gave them an idea of the habitat in which they existed. 
"Here, in a single Ethiopian valley, we have nearly a mile-thick stack of superimposed sediments and 12 horizons yielding hominid fossils. These discoveries confirm the Middle Awash study area as the world's best window on human evolution," White adds.

The Mona Lisa has inspired many imitations, like this poster advertising contact lenses
Hidden behind the Mona Lisa's enigmatic smile are millions of invisible dots, research shows.
According to research presented recently at Italy's Uffizi Gallery in Florence, the Mona Lisa consists of countless of dot layers applied with a technique of microdivided brushstrokes. 
The dot research was revealed at the exhibition "The mind of Leonardo - the universal genius at work", which runs at the gallery until January 2007.
Jacques Franck, a consultant at the Armand Hammer Center for Leonardo Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles, says the technique is somewhat similar to pointillism used by the French neo-impressionists in the late 19th century. 
"Examples of this microdivision of tones exist since the ancient Romans. Leonardo took an existing techniques, but used it to the extreme, like nobody else," says Franck.
The painting technique is called 'sfumato', from the Italian word 'fumo', meaning smoke. And it produces an almost 3D effect, the result of the delicate brushwork that blends light, shadow, and contours.
Da Vinci never really explained how he was able to blend shadow and light in such an imperceptible way. 
The only reference to the sfumato technique appears in his notes on the painting.
"Light and shade should blend without lines or borders, in the manner of smoke," he wrote.
Applying science
Franck examined Leonardo's works using what he calls an "archaeological approach".
He took a close look at another da Vinci work, 'Drapery study for a seated figure', which hangs in The Louvre, and noticed that Leonardo used minute brushstrokes to produce the 3D effect of the draperies. 
"The technique is visible, as he used tempera [a type of emulsion of oil and water, often using egg]. On the contrary, in oil painting traces would have been masked by a delicate velatura or glaze," Franck says. 
Franck, an artist himself, has been copying Leonardo's works since he was eight.
And Franck backed up his microdivision theory by reconstructing the Mona Lisa's eye through six steps, represented by panels on display at the Uffizi exhibition. 
He started with a poplar panel, similar to the one Leonardo used to paint the Mona Lisa in 1503-1506. 
Franck treated the panel with gypsum and animal glue, then painted an eye with a brush, but using black chalk.
Then he applied a semi-opaque, diluted oil-based wash to soften the chalk lines and then retouched the details with microscopic brushstrokes.
He had to apply many layers until they blended together. 
According to Franck, details such as the smile and eyes contain between 30 and 40 brush strokes per millimetre. Essentially, Leonardo was working as a miniaturist would.
"He may have made one square millimetre a day. This means it might have taken Leonardo about 10 years to complete the Mona Lisa," Franck says.
Enigmatic smile
Lisa di Antonio Maria Gherardini, the Mona Lisa, has been fascinating art lovers since her portrait was completed toward the end of the life of Leonardo, who lived from 1452-1519. 
Attempts to solve the enigma around her smile, described by the 16th century artist and writer Giorgio Vasari as "more divine than human", have included theories that the noblewoman was happily pregnant, suffering from asthma, had facial paralysis or that the smile was the result of a compulsive gnashing of teeth.
Franck's theory is raising a debate among art historians.
"I find it absolutely untrue. Leonardo did use the sfumato, but his painting technique is also very firm. I have seen the Mona Lisa under a magnifying glass and really, I could not see any dot," says da Vinci scholar and UK professor of art history Martin Kemp, from the University of Oxford.
Franck argues that it is scientifically impossible to distinguish the dots with a magnifying glass. 
"Light penetrates each dot, producing reflection, diffraction, and diffusion. Thus, when you look at the painting, the surface appears homogeneous. No dot can be seen. Moreover, in my works the dots completely disappeared within three years. The same might have happened with the Mona Lisa," Franck says.
How about x-ray evidence? 
Indeed, x-ray images of Franck's copies are very similar to x-ray pictures of the master's works: they all show something similar to smoke. 
"The layers of paint are so thin that x-ray simply goes through," Franck says. 
According to the curators of the exhibition, Franck's hypothesis is "convincing". 
"It is compatible with the material evidence of the Mona Lisa as analysed by the Louvre's laboratory," they write in the exhibition catalogue.

Venus' south pole, by day and night. The left hand image is the view by day, showing sunlight reflected from the tops of clouds. The right hand image, taken using infrared sensors, shows a dynamic spiral cloud, with the darker regions corresponding to thicker cloud cover
The newly arrived Venus Express spacecraft has relayed the first view of the planet's south pole, revealing a dark vortex and an odd cloud-type structure. 
"We're already experiencing the hot, dynamic environment of Venus," says project scientist Dr Hakan Svedhem. 
Venus Express captured its first images of its host planet the day on Wednesday, the day after it slipped into orbit following a five month journey.
The European-built craft is expected to spend two Venusian days - which is more than a year on Earth - studying the planet's dense and turbulent atmosphere.
The mission will attempt to learn why a planet so similar in size and composition to Earth ended up so vastly different. 
Venus has an extremely thick and toxic atmosphere that traps heat more effectively than any other planet in the solar system. 
Its surface temperature is hotter than Mercury, which orbits closer to the Sun, and its atmospheric pressure is similar to Earth's pressure about a kilometre beneath the ocean. 
Although the new images are relatively low-quality - when the probe reaches its final orbit scientists expect more than 100 times better resolution - researchers are intrigued by the clear structures and unexpected details seen in the planet's atmosphere. 
The Sun-lit images primarily show reflected light from Venus' cloud tops, down to a height of about 65 kilometres above the planet's surface. 
The night view, which was taken using infrared sensors, shows a dynamic spiral of clouds in the lower atmosphere, similar to a structure previously seen at the planet's north pole. 
The pictures were taken from a distance of about 200,000 kilometres. 
Zooming in on Venus
Venus Express is in the process of tightening its orbit, which will eventually reach as close as 250 kilometres above the planet's surface. 
Venus Express is the first spacecraft to visit Venus since NASA's Magellan radar mapping mission of the 1990s.
The probe is equipped with seven instruments, many of which are spares from Europe's ongoing Mars Express mission and the Rosetta comet probe. 
Researchers hope to unlock the history and mechanisms of Venus' dense and toxic atmosphere. 
They want to understand how the presence of carbon dioxide, water vapour and sulfuric gases trap heat in the planet's atmosphere, similar to how a glass greenhouse warms plants on Earth.

Chernobyl surrounded by a crumbling concrete outer layer, which the international community hopes will by replaced by a sturdier steel jacket by 2012
Twenty years ago, explosions at the Chernobyl power plant sent a huge radioactive cloud into the air in the world's worst civilian nuclear accident that still affects millions of people today. 
On 26 April 1986, at 1.23 am local time, a series of explosions ripped through reactor four at the plant in the north of what is today Ukraine, near its border with Belarus.
Radiation fell across much of Europe. 
For days, the Soviet leadership refused to admit, either to its own people or to the world, what had happened less than 100 kilometres north of a major city, Kiev, and near the huge Dniepr River that crisscrossed Ukraine and provided much of its water supply. 
Only after the news blackout ended were 135,000 people evacuated from the most affected areas around the plant. 
To this day, Chernobyl fuels controversies over the use of nuclear power, attracts tourists and researchers, feeds fears of another release, continues to claim victims, and gobbles huge amounts of international funds. 
An army of some 600,000 'liquidators' - firemen, soldiers and civilians - helped to construct a concrete sarcophagus meant to contain the reactor for 20 to 30 years before a more permanent structure could be built. 
The fate awaiting these people and others exposed to radiation from the blast is one of the main controversies still surrounding the plant. 
In its latest report on the disaster released in September, the UN estimates that fewer people will eventually perish than was initially predicted. 
The report, the work of some 100 scientists from eight UN agencies, says up to 4000 will eventually die as a result of the accident, in addition to the nearly 60 people who have already died. 
Environmental groups like Greenpeace reject the findings as "whitewash", collusion "with the nuclear lobby" and "insulting for the victims". They estimate that the death toll will be in the tens of thousands. 
Psychological problems
In addition to health effects like thyroid cancer, survivors also deal with psychological problems. 
A study of more than 2000 liquidators by the Serbsky Psychiatric Institute in Moscow found that two thirds of them suffered from psychological illnesses. 
"Considering their young age at the time of the accident, all of the negative effects have not appeared yet," says Galina Rumyantseva, who led the study. 
Regions affected by the accident remain today both socially and economically devastated. 
Some 350,000 people have been evacuated from the surrounding areas in all. Some 784,320 hectares of prime agricultural land remain ruined, as do 700,000 hectares of forest. 
The UN estimates that the eventual price tag of the disaster will run to hundreds of billions of US dollars. 
Today, the sarcophagus over reactor four is cracked and crumbling, raising fears that more radiation can be released. 
Some 28 countries have pledged to chip in more than US$750 million toward the construction of a new 20,000 tonne steel case.
The cover is expected  to cost between US$1 and $2 billion dollars and is hoped to be finished by 2012. 
But it will take at least 100 years to safely get rid of dangerous fuel and debris inside the plant, says spokesperson Yulia Marusich. 
The plant, whose last reactor was shut down for good only in 2000, continues to attract attention.
Tourists come to gawk, while researchers come to observe the remarkable flourishing of flora and fauna. 
Hundreds of mostly elderly people who lived in villages around the plant have ignored government restrictions and warnings of radiation to resettle in the 30 kilometre exclusion zone around the plant, raising animals and eating fruits and berries from the radiation-soaked land. 
The final effects from the series of explosions that occurred in the early hours at a Soviet nuclear power plant in 1986 may not be known for years, scientists say. 
"We may not see anything today, but genetic modifications can appear in 20, 50 years," says Rudolf Alexakhin, director of the Agricultural Radiology Institute in Moscow.

Workers set up the dig at Visocica Hill to look for evidence of an ancient pyramid, the so-called Bosnian Pyramid of the Sun
Excavation work has started north of Sarajevo on what a Bosnian explorer says are Europe's first pyramids. 
A group of experts explored the narrow entrance of a 3.8 kilometre tunnel believed to lead to one of the two hills resembling pyramids, about 30 kilometres from the Bosnian capital. 
As residents of the nearby town of Visoko eagerly watched, digging began on one of 10 sites, 20-by-50 metres, on slopes of a hill covered by vegetation. 
"Initial observations showed that the tunnel was man-made," says geologist Nadjia Nukic after examining the initial unblocked section of the tunnel. 
Last year Semir Osmanagic, a self-styled Bosnian explorer, started initial investigations in the area, convinced the 'constructions' on Visocica and Pljesivica hills were the work of builders from an unknown civilisation. 
He says further research using satellite pictures has provided more evidence for his case.
The images show the hills cooled a lot faster than their surroundings, he says, proving the substance of the structures was less dense and therefore probably made by humans. 
"With the paucity of contrary evidence, the hills are presumed to be anthropogenic structures of potentially colossal proportions," says Bosnian geophysicist Dr Amer Smailbegovic.
The explorers, who are expected to be joined by an Egyptian archaeologist and a geologist later in the year, hope to find stone blocks, or the steps of the 'pyramids'. 
Osmanagic, who wears an Indiana Jones-like hat and clothing and says he sharpened his eye for archaeology on numerous trips around the world, says the two structures are precisely aligned with the four points of the compass. 
On the outskirts of the town, Visocica Hill, which Osmanagic refers to as the Bosnian Pyramid of the Sun, stands some 220 metres high, with a square base of more than 400 by 400 metres. 
Osmanagic says he sees astonishing similarities between the structures and Mexican pyramids dating back to about 200 AD, which also come in pairs, one believed to represent the Sun and the other the Moon. 
The excavation work, led by a recently established foundation of local archaeologists and volunteers, will last for 200 days.
The first results would be known in three weeks, Osmanagic says. 
The director of the Visoko Historic Heritage museum, Senad Hodovic, says he is no sceptic.
"The pyramids are obviously the work of man. But we need proper and serious analysis to show who built them and when." 
Hodovic says he has spent years urging authorities to support archaeological research on the plateau of the hill, which is recorded in historic annals as the site of a medieval Bosnian town. 
He says the shape and monumental size of the structures is not typical for Bosnian constructions of the Middle Ages. 
Visoko, a small town that has been slowly dying from economic decline since Bosnia's 1992-95 war, is hoping what has been dubbed the "the new wonder of the world" will offer it a brighter future.
Pyramid-mania seems to have caught everyone. 
Local souvenir shops selling oriental style coffee pots and plates now offer slippers, ceramic coin-boxes, t-shirts and brandy with pyramid logos.

Seb the German shepherd smells sheep poo for a living
A sniffer dog has been trained to tell which sheep have parasitic worms, Australian researchers show.
The dog's skills will be used to develop an electronic handheld 'sniffer' device to detect gastrointestinal nematodes in sheep.
The parasite detection initiative has the potential to save the Australian sheep industry millions of dollars a year, say agricultural scientists at Melbourne's La Trobe University.
Internal parasites are a constant headache for sheep farmers because they cause serious production losses.
They can interfere with a sheep's wool and meat growth, and make the animal weak and susceptible to other diseases. They can even kill.
Anti-parasitic drugs have been the weapon of choice for a number of years, however many parasites have become resistant to the drugs.
So the researchers tried something different.
"Scents, and the use of sniffer dogs to detect them, are used to determine the presence of a number of substances," says chief investigator Associate Professor Mark Sandeman. 
"So we set out to ascertain whether the presence of intestinal parasites in sheep could be detected by their scent."
It seems they can, with Seb the female German shepherd being trained to detect parasite-infected sheep droppings by its odour with 80-90% accuracy.
"We used [Seb] in a classic training sense; just as dogs are trained to detect drugs at airports, we trained [Seb] to detect parasites," he says.
Bags of infested poo were placed among bags of non-infested poo and Seb was trained to pick out the infested sample.
The whiff of parasites
Sandeman says it is too early to say exactly which chemicals, or groups of chemicals Seb is sniffing out.
"We don't know exactly what the dog is sniffing but we're picking up some differences in terms of chemical signatures that would suggest there are a number of different compounds that are changed between infected and uninfected sheep," he says.
The researchers are now working on developing an electronic handheld 'sniffer' device similar to those used in the food manufacturing industry. 
They are confident they will have a prototype within five years.
"We thought about training dogs to use on farms, but [there were many] technical difficulties. So instead we thought it would be better to have some small device that farmers could use," Sandeman says.
He envisages a farmer holding the sniffer device near the rear end of sheep or near poo.
Eventually, the detector might be refined using biosensor technology and sheep may be checked automatically for parasites, he says.
The Australian Sheep Industry CRC is funding the work.

Hello Mr Personality! Researchers are learning that squid have distinct character traits
Squid have personalities that appear to be passed down from parent to offspring, says an Australian researcher.
But those traits can be modified by environment, says Dr David Sinn, who will present his research at the Australasian Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour conference in Sydney this week.
Sinn, a research fellow at the University of Tasmania, observed behaviour in the southern dumpling squid (Euprymna tasmanica), which is found in waters around South Australia, Victoria and Tasmania.
In general, these squid tend to be solitary, unromantic animals with a propensity to cannibalise their neighbours and take sexual favours by force, he says.
Within that profile Sinn found some squid are shy, retiring, cautious types while others are bold, assertive and adventurous.
"It turns out some squid are bolder than others," he says.
"For example, when presented by a threatening stimulus they attack the stimulus or are ambivalent to it.
"Others are shyer, they don't inspect a threat, they back up, they flee."
Assertiveness training for squid
Previous research suggests these character traits in squid are up to 30% hereditary, he says.
But there's evidence that some squid can adapt to their environment by learning to either temper their overconfidence or shake off their shyness.
Sinn says squid and other cephalopods like octopuses and cuttlefish are relatively intelligent and, relative to body size, have brains the size of cats.
This is probably to compensate for the loss of their protective shells during evolution, he says, with more brain capacity needed to protect their vulnerable bodies from predators.
Population dynamics
Sinn says understanding the ecology and evolution of personality provides a key to understanding what drives animal populations.
He says it's unclear which personality traits confer an evolutionary edge, although it appears that having a mix of personalities is essential for a population to survive a disturbance.
"Individual behaviour is going to determine how far [an animal population] disperses, its growth rate, how well it survives and potentially how it reproduces, so all these things are driving population dynamics," he says.
"If you want to know how to predict population abundance maybe we need to know more about individual behaviours and how they're going to react to environmental change."
Squid lovers
Sinn's next project is to investigate the role of personality in the sex life of squid.
He says mating in the squid world is forceful on the part of the male but females play a role in choosing to associate with prospective mates or in attempting to rebuff unwanted advances.
He says early evidence suggests bolder females prefer bolder males while shy females are less choosy.
Sinn also intends to look at personality in lizards.

Web developers and doctors running clinical websites need to be aware of possible misuse of their online images, US doctors warn
Porn seekers are finding a new source of online images, doctors have discovered.
They're downloading images of diseased genitalia from dermatology websites, sites that were originally set up to educate doctors.
Dr Christoph Lehmann and colleagues, from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, noticed a marked jump in queries for images of genital areas from their searchable archive of clinical photographs.
They investigated and published their results in the latest issue of the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology.
The researchers assessed request patterns received by the site over 6 months, in terms of diagnosis, age group and anatomical site. 
Of the more than 7800 dermatological images available on the site, 5.5% involve genital regions. But 12% of queries for a specific diagnosis involved a genital area.
Also 37% of the requests for an anatomical site involved a genital region, and 12% of the 10,000 free text queries were for images of genitalia. 
In searches that specified both an age group and an anatomical site, images involving children were 48% more likely to be requested than those involving an adult. 
An analysis of the top 43 referring sites to the dermatology service revealed that 21% were pornographic or fetish sites. But these sites only accounted for 14.3% of all 141,285 referrals. 
"Developers of online clinical image libraries containing potentially sensitive health information on topics such as sexuality and anatomy must be aware of issues beyond technical and domain knowledge," the authors say.
"Anonymous misuse of collaborative archives must be anticipated, addressed and prevented to preserve their integrity and the integrity of the learning communities they support."

Neurologists say people whose dreaming spills over into wakefulness may be prone to near-death experiences
The brain's tendency to occasionally blur the line between sleep and wakefulness may help explain the phenomenon of near-death experience, preliminary research suggests. 
It's been an open question as to why some people see bright light, feel detached from their bodies or have other extraordinary sensations when they are close to dying or believe they might die. 
Some people view these so-called near-death experiences as evidence of life after death, and many neurologists have considered the phenomenon too complex for scientific study. 
But the new research, published in the journal Neurology, implicates the blending of sleep and wake states as a biological cause. 
Researchers found that adults who say they've had such an experience are also likely to have a history of what's called REM intrusion, where aspects of the dream state of sleep spill over into wakefulness. 
People may, for example, feel paralysed when they first wake up, or have visual or auditory hallucinations as they fall asleep or awaken. 
Of the 55 study participants who've had a near-death experience, 60% have also experienced REM intrusion at some point in their lives. That compares with 24% of 55 adults in a comparison group. 
Arousing the body
The findings suggest that the brain's arousal system predisposes some people to both REM intrusion and near-death experience, according to the study authors, led by Dr Kevin Nelson, a neurologist at the University of Kentucky in Lexington. 
This arousal system, Nelson says, regulates not only REM sleep, but also attention and alertness during waking hours, including during dangerous situations. 
And many of the features of REM intrusions, he says, parallel those of near-death experience. 
During REM sleep, visual centres in the brain are highly active, while the limb muscles are temporarily paralysed.
So REM intrusion during peril could promote the visions of light and sensation of "being dead" that people often have during a near-death experience, according to Nelson. 
Not the whole story
Other evidence supports a role for REM intrusion in near-death experiences, he says.
One important fact, Nelson notes, is that stimulation of the vagus nerve, which connects the brain stem to the heart, lungs and intestines, triggers REM intrusion. And heightened activity in this nerve is sure to be part of the body's "fight-or-flight" response to danger. 
Still, Nelson says he doesn't think REM intrusion will turn out to be the "whole explanation" for near-death experience, and the findings shouldn't detract from the meaning people have taken from their experiences. 
"My work is spiritually neutral," Nelson says, noting the research can only look at how the brain contributes to near-death experience, and not why the phenomenon occurs. 
"The 'why' can't be addressed by scientific inquiry," he says.

Grooming is important to cattle but would they use a hairbrush if they had hands?
Beef cattle use tools to keep their coats healthy, says an Australian researcher, suggesting they are more than all brawn and no brains.
Animal behaviour scientist Bob Kilgour, who works for the New South Wales Department of Primary Industries, observed the grooming behaviour of various breeds of beef cattle at pasture on a number of properties over several days.
He found they spend about 3% of their day grooming and preening themselves, even in the absence of parasites.
They mainly use their tongues and hind hooves to groom the rear end of their bodies, Kilgour says.
But they also use inanimate objects like trees, branches, fence posts and stumps to get at areas they can't reach, he says.
"They'll walk up to fallen tree limbs which have protruding branches and groom around their eyes," he says.
"So they're making very finely controlled motor movements to groom around sensitive parts of their body."
Kilgour will tell the Australasian Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour conference in Sydney this week that this deliberate choice of different kinds of objects suggests they are being used as tools.
He says this is a bold suggestion because the definition of tool use conventionally relies on an ability to hold and manipulate objects.
"These are animals that can't pick things up and manipulate them, but nonetheless they are making decisions about what they are going to use to groom their bodies," he says.
"I'm postulating this could redefine our idea of tool use.
"It's difficult to relate this to intelligence but I'd just like to say there's a lot more going on up there than we really know about."
Comparisons with similar species
Kilgour compared grooming behaviour of beef cattle with undomesticated, but related, species including bison, water buffalo, banteng and eland.
He found similar grooming patterns.
This suggests an evolutionary purpose for grooming, Kilgour says. For example, maintaining the integrity of their coat may protect against invasion by parasites, bacteria or grass seeds.
"If you find this behaviour occurs in closely related species you can say this confers some survival advantage on animals, therefore it's a necessary behaviour," he says.
"So in production systems, like feedlots, where we try to stop animals grooming because we don't want to push the fence posts over, we may be thwarting what is a valuable natural behaviour."
He says attempts to prevent grooming may therefore be misguided and a denial of the animal's right to express normal behaviour, one of the central elements of animal welfare.

This new type of brain-machine interface could replace joysticks in online gaming or be used as a communication tool for pople who cannot speak or sign
A computerised keyboard that translates electrical impulses from brainwave signals into letters and words could be available in the next five years, German researchers say.
In the short term, the technology will allow its developers, from the Fraunhofer Institute and the Charit&eacute; University Hospital in Berlin to watch a brain function in real time. 
But in the long term, such a brain-machine interface could replace the joystick in electronic gaming or serve as a communication tool for people unable to speak or sign. 
"We are dreaming of something like a baseball cap with electrodes in the cap that can measure the brainwaves," says one of the scientists behind the project Professor Klaus-Robert M&uuml;ller of the Fraunhofer Institute. 
